---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Melbourne: 4 July 2014: Scott Morrison's obsession with secrecy; Abbott Government's disregard for the High Court"
date: "2014-07-04"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "Scott Morrison's obsession with secrecy"
  - "Abbott Government's disregard for the High Court"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211410599
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3267316%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE   FRIDAY, 4 JULY 2014  MELBOURNE 

 SUBJECT/ S: Scott Morrison’s obsession w ith secrecy; Abbott  Government’s disregard for the High Court. 

 RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Well thank you for coming this afternoon. It’s is almost a week since  we first had reports of an asylum seeker vessel reportedly having on board 150  Tamil asylum seekers, since then we have heard nothing from this Minister about  the safety of those on board or indeed the safety of those on board a reported  second vessel containing Tamil asylum seekers.    

 We’ve heard nothing from this Minister about what assistance has been provided by  Australian authorities. The lack of information that has been provided by this  Government is appalling. We see reports this morning emanating from the Sri  Lankan Government that these people will now be handed over to the Sri Lankan  Navy on the high seas. Once again we are hearing more from overseas governments  about the actions of our Minister than we are hearing from Scott Morrison himself.  That is pathetic.    

 If in fact these reports are correct then we have grave concerns about how Australia  is meeting its international obligations to provide people safety when they seek  asylum. We have grave concerns about how it is possible to assess people’s asylum  claims while they are at sea. We have grave concerns about how it is possible to  assess all of these cases individually.    

 People who are on board these vessels will have different stories, they will have  different circumstances, and they will give rise to different strengths in their claims  to invoke Australia’s international obligations. And so we do not understand how it is  going to be possible to assess all of that individually when it would appear that  collectively all of these people are currently steaming toward Sri Lanka.   

 Now, none of this is about putting Australia back on the table. The Regional  Resettlement Arrangement, which was negotiated by the then Labor Government  and the Government of PNG, would be able to handle this situation in a way which  meets Australia’s obligations to provide safe refuge, in a way which would allow  each of these people to have their claims individually and properly assessed, and  would do all of that without putting Australia back on the table. None of this is about  that. All we are seeing here is a Minister who is throwing out the human rights  handbook in order to protect his personal political scoreboard. And that is a disgrace.  Are there any questions?   

 JOURNALIST: So you would prefer to see these asylum seekers taken to Manus  Island rather than sent back to Sri Lanka?   

 MARLES: Well if these reports are true, it would be completely appropriate to have  those people come through Christmas Island and then go, in accordance with the  Regional Resettlement Arrangement, to Manus Island where safe refuge, we hope,  could be provided and their assessments could be fully made. That is the basis upon  which that agreement was reached. None of this is about putting that issue, the  question of Australia being on or off the table. Australia is off the table. And the  offshore processing regime is still in place. This is about a Minister tying himself in  knots, throwing out the humanitarian handbook in order to protect his political  scoreboard.    

 JOURNALIST: Does Labor support the ‘national interest’ test for people who arrive  without a visa?   

 MARLES: We’ve heard reports this morning as well that in relation to those people  who are in Australia, that the Minister will be seeking to get around the decision of  the High Court a couple of weeks ago by invoking a ‘national interest’ test pursuant  to regulations, which were put in place back in 1994. This is a desperate attempt by  the Minister to bend the legislation to his will. Last year we saw the Parliament make  a clear decision that it did not wish to have Temporary Protection Visas as a part of  Australia’s visa regime. At that point we saw this Minister engage in an act of  petulance and essentially close up shop and in the process seek to place himself  above the Parliament. As a result of the High Court decision a couple of weeks ago,  we now see this Minister seek to place himself above the High Court as well.    

 Now if the Minister has solid legal advice that he can pursue the course that he is  seeking to pursue he ought to be making that advice public to the Australian people  right now. This would appear to be a very exotic step that he is taking. I am not  sure whether there are other examples of this that have been used in the context of  protection visas. He ought to be making that legal advice known to the Australian  people right now.   

 This is a Minister who has placed himself above the Parliament, placed himself above  the High Court, he certainly places himself above the Australian people in not giving  people information, and for him, Australia’s institutions, our legal system, our  parliamentary democracy, is a mere afterthought.   

 JOURNALIST: Sri Lanka’s High Commissioner to Australia yesterday said that those  who were returned to Sri Lanka would face the Magistrates Court and be released on  bail. What do you make of those comments?   

 MARLES: Well at the heart of our international obligations is a commitment of non-refoulement. Not to return people to a position of danger where they are seeking to  flee from that. Now, what danger people face in returning to Sri Lanka is going to  depend on their circumstances, on their individual stories. And of course that is why  people need be individually assessed to see what obligations and the strength in  which they invoke Australia’s obligations. That is why there needs to be a process of  individual assessment.  But if there is anybody who in the midst of all of this is returned to a position of not  being safe then Australia would have squarely breached our international obligations  and in that respect I note the comments that have been made by UNHCR today.   

 JOURNALIST: I am not clear on your answer before of whether or not Labor  supports the ‘national interest’ test?   

 MARLES: We do not support what this Government is seeking to do in getting  around a decision of the High Court, which makes it plain that permanent protection  visas, which are an available mechanism within our humanitarian program, ought to  be implemented. That is clear. Perhaps I need to make this also very clear -    

 JOURNALIST: Does Labor support the ‘national interest’ test?   

 MARLES: We do not support the use of the ‘national interest’ test in this way.   

 JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that it may set an international precedent?   

 MARLES: Well, what we are seeing here is this is an exotic use of a ‘national  interest’ test, which has been put in place by regulations dating back to 1994. The  use of this is at best exotic in the context of humanitarian visas. Perhaps the more  fundamental point is this. Temporary protection visas are bad policy and we are  utterly opposed to them. Temporary protection visas have been found not to work in  terms of being any form of deterrent at all. In fact the use of temporary protection  visas in the past has seen an increase in the number of asylum seeker vessels  coming to Australia rather than a decrease. During the Howard years they were  effectively abandoned as a policy tool both because they did not work and because  of the back bench revolt which was experienced by John Howard at that time.    

 This is bad policy in terms of what it seeks to do, but the consequences of it is that it  puts people in a state of limbo, in a state of dislocation, and that is bad for them and  it is bad for the Australia public. So we are opposed to temporary protection visas  and that is why we did not support them. But what we have seen from this Minister  is, faced with a Parliament which takes that position, he’s acted petulantly. The High  Court has called him on that and now he is seeking to place himself above the High  Court by this particular device, which is legally exotic and which is essentially  seeking to place himself above a decision of the High Court, the effect of which  should be to now roll out permanent protection visas.    

 JOURNALIST: If Australia is found to be in breach of international protocols should  Scott Morrison step down?   

 MARLES: How the Government goes about its business in terms of which people do  what jobs I will leave to the Prime Minister. I am concerned about ensuring that this  Government is held to account to fulfil Australia’s international obligations in the  context of what is reportedly happening on the Indian Ocean right now. And I am  also concerned that we have a Government and a Minister who acts in accordance  with the will of the Parliament and in accordance with the will of the High Court and  therefore in accordance with law. And that is what is now being thrown in jeopardy  by this exotic legal use of a ‘national interest’ test that is found in regulations that  certainly haven’t been invoked often if at all since 1994.   

 JOURNALIST: Have you sought a briefing from the Government as to what may  have happened to these asylum seekers and how they have been processed?   

 MARLES: We have not been briefed by the Government in relation to that, but it is  not a matter of us being briefed. It is a matter of the Australian people being  informed as to what is going on here. It is one thing for the Shadow Minister, in the 

 form of me, to be given an explanation as to what is going on in confidential  circumstances. But the issue here is that the Australian people have a right to know.    

 It is not a matter of mere curiosity on the part of the Australian public about the fate  of hundreds of people or about the actions of their own Government. The Australian  people have a right to know. Ultimately the Government are responsible to the  Australian people and the briefing that this Minister should be giving is not to me or  to any other politician it is to the Australian people. Thank you.   

 ENDS   

