---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Parliament House, Canberra: 3 December 2014: Scott Morrison's botched bill"
date: "2014-12-03"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "Scott Morrison's botched bill"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211416222
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3541770%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO    

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  WEDNESDAY 3 DECEMBER 2014    

 SUBJECT/S:         Scott Morrison’s botched bill    

 RICHARD MARLES: Today we have heard the Minister express a desire to start  processing people, well if that is the Minister’s concern, he could have been  processing people for the last 12 months. Let’s not forget it was this time last  year in an act of petulance when the Senate refused to put in place Scott  Morrison’s Temporary Protection Visas that he effectively closed up shop. That  he went on strike in terms of processing peoples claims and as a result have left  people in limbo for 12 months. If he wants to process people he can do that  irrespective of what happens in the Senate today. Today we’ve heard the  Minister express a desire not to send 1400 people to Nauru - if that is his  concern he can make it clear that he is not going to do that, and I assure that he  will not under any circumstances because Nauru is full. But it has nothing to do  with what is going on in the Senate today.    

 Today we have also heard the Minister express a desire to see children off  Christmas Island before Christmas - if that is the Minister’s concern he can make  sure that the children are taken off Christmas Island by Christmas - indeed he  could have done that months ago and it has got nothing to do with what is going  on in the Senate today. The truth is that this is politics at its worst. We have  seen the Minister walk around the Senate using these people as hostages for his  bad bill. He is using these people as bargaining chips in his political game and it  is outrageous. Now we have enormous concerns about the bill before the Senate  today and we have expressed those concerns. We do see however that there is  merit in the idea of a Safe Haven Enterprise Visa (SHEV) but from the very 

 moment the Minister announced this idea he has been doing everything he can  to run away from it. The bill that was introduced to this Parliament does not  provide for the implementation of a SHEV and its only in the last day that we  have seen amendments emerge which have been wholly inadequate and this  morning he announces that there will be more amendments done on the run to  try and salvage his bad bill. The reality is that from the moment Scott Morrison  did a deal with Clive Palmer he has been trying to get out of it. This is a man  who simply cannot be trusted. Any questions?    

 REPORTER:  Labor has been talking to the crossbenchers too, do you think it  will get through?    

 MARLES:  Well that ultimately is in the hands off the Senate, but yes we will  move amendments, we have amendments in relation to this bill, there is much of  it that we don’t like it. In respect of SHEV’s what we will seek to by amendment  is to make clear that if the conditions are met, which Scott Morrison and Clive  Palmer set, that those people ought to be entitled to a permanent visa. Now we  have been talking to the crossbenchers about that and we will seek an  amendment in those terms, and obviously the outcome is very much in the  hands of the Senate.    

 REPORTER:  Mr Marles will you seek through those amendments to break the  bill up, because it is quite an omnibus bill to say deal with the SHEVs as a  separate issue to the TPVs to get something through?    

 MARLES: Well you are right that it is a big bill, it is an omnibus bill and it has a  lot of content in it, frankly how the Government chooses to bundle its matters in  the legislation it puts before this Parliament is a matter for this Government.  What we will do is put in place amendments which make clear our opposition to  huge swathes of this bill and we will continue to prosecute those.    

 REPORTER:  Apart from the SHEVs, what else does Labor support in the bill?    

 MARLES: Well all of that I set out in my second reading speech when this bill  was in front of the House of Representatives. There is much in this legislation  that we don’t like, the removal for example of references to the UN Refugee  Convention is nothing other than a stunt and we are concerned about it, and we  will be moving an amendment to remove that part of the bill from this proposed  legislation. We are concerned about the fast tracking, we are concerned about  the limited review, we are concerned about the expansion of the maritime  powers in the context of trying to undermine an existing High Court case. There  is a lot of detail in this bill and we will be moving amendments around that but in  respect of the SHEV and that goes to the whole question of temporary protection  visas and the debate between that and permanent protection visas, we will be 

 making it clear that if the conditions that were set by Scott Morrison and Clive  Palmer are met, then such a person ought to gain a permanent visa.    

 REPORTER:  Mr Marles can I ask you, I know you just heard about the  amendments, the increase in the humanitarian intake as well as work rights for  people on community bridging visas while their applications are assessed?    

 MARLES: The work rights in terms of people on bridging visas is a step that we  welcome. In relation to the increase in the humanitarian intake, obviously that is  a good thing, but it should never have been cut. I mean that is what we need to  remember here, at the time that Labor was in power we had a humanitarian  program of 20,000 people a year. That was slashed in the first few days of this  Government down to 13,750. It should never have been cut, obviously it is good  that it is moving in the right direction but too little too late.    

 REPORTER: Scott Morrison says Labor and the Greens are irrelevant in terms of  negotiations on this bill, have you dealt yourself out?    

 MARLES:  We are making very clear our position in relation to this bill and the  question of permanent visas and temporary protection visas and as I have just  articulated, our view in relation to SHEVs. We hear a lot of talk from the Minister,  we hear a lot of chest beating of the kind to which you refer, it is not the way we  go about things, we make clear our position, we do our best to argue that, we  will see what the result is in the Senate.     

 REPORTER:  Mr Marles can I ask you about the ABC’s 7.30 programand some  of the allegations that were aired on that program in relation to the stress and  trauma involved in the boats issue under Labor?    

 MARLES:  Well, I’ll make a couple of points about that, firstly there were  allegations of political interference I make this point - those allegations have  been strenuously denied. I also make the point that what we need to see here is  an end to the loss of life at sea, obviously dealing with that loss of life must have  been a deeply distressing matter for anyone involved, we need to see an end to  the loss of life at sea, and that is why Labor put in place the regional processing  arrangement with Papua New Guinea, which to this point in time has been the  single most important step taken by any Australian Government in bringing an  end to the flow of asylum seeker vessels and bringing an end to deaths at sea.  The final point I would make about it is this, if anything is to come from what  was aired on the ABC last night, it is the need for transparency. We need to have  a transparent view as an Australian community of what our forces and our  authorities are doing on the high seas, and this Government has been singular in  which it has refused to provide that transparency to the Australian people. Thank  you. 

 

 

 ENDS    

 MEDIA ENQUIRIES:  LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563   

