---
title: "Transcript of joint doorstop interview: Fairfield Hospital: 24 July 2014: Abbott Government's $80 billion cuts to health and education; Abbott Government's $7 GP tax; AMA criticising the Abbott Government for moves to US-style health system; Hockey's authorised biography; Cabinet split on Budget; asylum seekers; Scott Morrison in witness protection"
date: "2014-07-24"
creators:
  - "King, Catherine"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH"
subjects:
  - "Abbott Government's $80 billion cuts to health and education"
  - "Abbott Government's $7 GP tax"
  - "AMA criticising the Abbott Government for moves to US-style health system"
  - "Hockey's authorised biography"
  - "Cabinet split on Budget"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Scott Morrison in witness protection"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211411520
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3298434%22
---

 

 THE HON CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON   

 THE HON CATHERINE KING MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR BALLARAT   

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP  FAIRFIELD HOSPITAL   THURSDAY, 24 JULY 2014   

 SUBJECT/ S: Abbott Government’s $80 billion cuts to health and  education; Abbott Government’s $7 GP tax; AMA criticising the Abbott  Government for moves to US-style health system; Hockey’s authorised  biography; Cabinet split on Budget; asylum seekers; Scott Morrison in  w itness protection.   

 CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Thanks for coming everybody.   

 It’s great to welcome Catherine King here to Fairfield hospital in the McMahon  electorate.   

 What a fantastic job Catherine has been doing in highlighting the unfairness and  bad policy in the Abbott Government’s Budget.   

 We have been talking today about the impact of the $80 billion health and  education cuts, particularly today, the health and hospital cuts, and their impact  on New South Wales and Western Sydney. And of course, the impact of the  Government’s unfair and ill thought out $7 GP tax.   

 Here in Fairfield, for example, we have the highest diabetes rates in metropolitan  Australia. We want people going to their doctor earlier to deal with this. We want  people engaging in preventative health in talking to their doctors about how they  can avoid getting sick rather than being forced to wait until they get sick. And of  course, the Government seems hell bent in making that harder.   

 They don’t understand the impact of their own cuts and their own changes on  areas like this and on areas across the country.   

 In Catherine, we have a Shadow Health Minister who does understand the  impact. A Shadow Minister who understands the portfolio better than the  Minister. And certainly understands the impacts of deep cuts to funding and of  charging $7 to see a doctor.   

 We now know the Treasurer wanted to go further. Maybe he wanted a higher GP  tax, maybe he wanted deeper cuts to hospitals.    

 What we know is that if he gets his way in future Budgets he will go even  further.   

 If the Australian people needed any evidence as to just how out of touch this  Government and this Treasurer is, then just look right there.   

 It’s great to welcome Catherine and I will ask her to talk in a bit more detail  about these cuts.   

 CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks very much  and it’s great to be here with Chris.   

 It’s terrific to be here at Fairfield hospital. Today we are talking again about the  horror again when it comes to health.   

 We know that here in New South Wales alone, there is a $16.5 billion cut from  hospital funding.   

 And we know that you can’t cut $16.5 billion from the public hospital system  without placing pressure on emergency departments, elective surgery, and  putting pressure on our doctors and nurses in our public hospital system. And  that means pressure for patients.   

 We are also seeing alongside that the Government’s GP tax, and we know, we  are hearing from doctors and patients right across the country, just what an  impact this will have on our primary healthcare system, being a barrier for  people to see their GP. 

 

 We heard yesterday from the President of the Australian Medical Association,  Professor Brian Owler, his concerns about what the GP tax will mean for patients  across the country. We have had, embarrassingly, overnight, the Minister for  Veterans Affairs having to write to veterans saying ‘no, we have always excluded  you from this tax’ because many of them are desperately worried about what  these cuts to health will mean for them. But if it’s okay for veterans to be  excluded from the GP tax, what about pensioners? What about vulnerable  patients in our communities?    

 The Government has got this totally wrong.   

 We have also heard from Brian Owler about the medical concerns the medical  association has about the direction the government wants to take health policy,  increasingly allowing private health insurers into primary care and really meaning  a managed care system in Australia, where if you have private health insurance  there will be one system for you and if you haven't got private health insurance  there will be a residual system. The AMA was belling the cat on that yesterday. A  very important point that I think has been lost somewhere in this health debate,  because it has been a very important focus on the GP tax, but very important to  highlight the direction this government, this Abbott government wants to take  health policy. It is the wrong direction. We don't want a two-tiered American  style system in this country. Medicare has served us well for thirty years and it  was right for the AMA to absolutely defend it yesterday.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen what do you think of Joe Hockey’s book?   

 BOWEN: Well I haven't read it yet, but what we see is the ongoing farce of this  Budget. The Treasurer introduces a bad and unfair Budget and then he fails to  sell a bad Budget and in fairness to him it is very hard to sell a very bad Budget.  Now you see his colleagues expressing a lack of confidence in his judgment and  you see him boasting about how he would have actually gone further if he had  his way but he was stopped by the Prime Minister. I note, not by the Prime  Minister for policy reasons, not for fairness reasons, but for political reasons.    

 So I think the Treasurer needs to focus a little more on his Budget and on  listening to the anger of the Australian people about the deep cuts and the tax  increases that are contained in that Budget.   

 JOURNALIST: But isn't that the job of the Treasurer, to make tough decisions?   

 BOWEN: Of course it is the job of the Treasurer to make tough decisions and  successful Treasurers have. But tough decisions aren't about attacking the cost  of living pressures on Australian families, making them worse, they are not about 

 deep cuts to things like health and education. Tough decisions are about  ensuring Budget sustainability in a fair way. And as Joe Hockey himself has  pointed out previous governments, including Labor governments have introduced  more fiscal consolidation than he has introduced, but has done so in a way that  doesn't fundamentally attack the social fabric, as he has done, doesn't engage  fundamentally unfair decisions as he has done. Of course he is so ultimately out  of touch with what is necessary for Australia.   

 JOURNALIST: Will you read the book?   

 BOWEN: Of course I will read the book. Of course.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen can you remember the last Treasurer who didn't push  their Prime Minister to go further on Budget cuts?   

 BOWEN: Chris Bowen.    

 JOURNALIST: And isn't that what Costello did, pushing the Prime Ministers to  make further savings?   

 BOWEN: Of course Treasurers and Prime Ministers have a range of discussions  and a range of process when bringing down a Budget. But as I said in answer to  your question, who was the last Treasurer who didn't push the Prime Minister to  make further cuts, well I didn't because the Prime Minister that I worked for,  when I was Treasurer, we were of the same mind of what was necessary for the  Australian economy and the Australian people. And we have got a Treasurer who  is backgrounding against his Prime Minister, leadership speculation, encouraged  by the Prime Minister’s office, I mean no wonder Liberal MPs are being quoted in  the newspaper this morning expressing their despair at this spectacle of the  Treasurer and the Prime Ministers public positioning in relation to the book, but  much more importantly to the Budget, which is fundamentally a bad Budget.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen, just wanted to ask you for your reaction to reports  this morning that India has refused to take back 150 asylum seekers?   

 BOWEN: Well yet again we seem to hear more from India about what is  happening here than we hear from our own government. So the Indian  government has been more transparent with the Australian people than the  Australian government has been.    

 Scott Morrison treats the parliament with contempt and the Australian people  with contempt by refusing to give full and proper updates. Now this is a very  serious situation and he should be being honest with the Australian people about  what his plans are. What governments does he talk to? What has been the  response?  

 

 An immigration minister has to be honest with the Australian people and provide  information on the good days and the bad, not just beat their chest on the good  days, but front up and be honest on the bad days. When there is a difficult story  to explain, this Minister goes into the witness protection programme and refuses  to acknowledge what is happening out on the seas, uses lame excuses to avoid  accountability.    

 We have got a situation where there is a 150 people somewhere in the world, in  the care of the Australian government and the Australian government refuses to  talk about it.    

 We have a Treasurer who said over his dead body, not on his watch, would any  child be returned to another country. We have children on this boat and yet we  find a government denial about what is happening with this boat.    

 They are happy to talk about boats not coming, but when a boat has come, they  are not prepared to be upfront with the Australian people about what they are  doing and dealing with this situation.    

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879   

