---
title: "A regional security architecture where everyone rises: speech, Singapore"
date: "2015-05-30"
creators:
  - "Carter, Ashton, B."
source: "UNITED STATES. SECRETARY OF DEFENSE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211864123
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3870411%22
---

 EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY -- AS PREPARED/CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

   1 

 SECRETARY OF DEFENSE ASH CARTER  “A REGIONAL SECURITY ARCHITECTURE WHERE  EVERYONE RISES”   IISS SHANGRI-LA DIALOGUE, SINGAPORE 

 SATURDAY, MAY 30, 2015    

 Thank you, John, for that kind introduction.  And thank you for sponsoring  this remarkable forum.  Over its history, IISS has hosted invaluable conversations  like the Shangri-La Dialogue and produced important scholarship.  Through it all,  you’ve made our world more secure.  On behalf of the United States, thank you.  

 One reason I’ve enjoyed coming to this Dialogue since attending the first  one in 2002 is the opportunity to visit with the many good friends the United States  has in this region.  On my way to Southeast Asia, I attended the change-of-command at U.S. Pacific Command in Hawaii and met with the Philippines’  National Defense Secretary Gazmin.  When I arrived in Singapore, I had the  opportunity to visit with Prime Minister Lee, who gave a terrific keynote last night,  and with Minister Ng to talk about regional challenges and a deepening defense  relationship.   

 Of course, I see so many friends and partners here today, and I will meet  with many of you after this session.  From Singapore, I will travel to Vietnam with  visits in Haiphong and then Hanoi, where Vietnamese Defense Minister General  Thanh and I will sign a Joint Vision Statement that for the first time commits both  the United States and Vietnam to greater operational cooperation.  And then I will  fly on to India to tour the Eastern Naval Command at Visag and meet with my  counterpart in New Delhi to sign the new U.S.-India Defense Framework that will  guide military cooperation for the next decade. 

 Each of these stops, just like my visits to Japan and the Republic of Korea  last month, is a reminder of the regional demand for persistent American  engagement and the importance of the regional security architecture that has  helped so many Asia-Pacific nations rise and prosper.   

 That’s the theme of my talk today: the United States wants a shared regional  architecture that is strong enough, capable enough, and connected enough to ensure  that all Asia-Pacific people and nations have the opportunity to rise - and continue  to rise - in the future.  The United States wants a future in which an Indonesian  fisherman, an energy executive from Malaysia, an entrepreneur from Singapore, a  small business owner in California, and a Chinese businesswoman - just to name a  few - have the security and opportunity to rise and prosper.  And the United States  wants to protect the rights of all countries, whether large or small, to win…to rise,  prosper and determine their own destiny.  

 EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY -- AS PREPARED/CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

   2 

 To realize that future, the Asia-Pacific’s security architecture must be  inclusive, open, and transparent.  It must respect rights, not just might.  It cannot  shy away from the hard issues…it must provide a forum to openly discuss the  challenges we face, so we can tackle them collectively.  It must be action-oriented  to help us manage today’s challenges and prevent tomorrow’s crises.  And it must  reward cooperation, not coercion. 

 That’s an audacious idea, but we meet today in a country that demonstrates  what determination, consistency, and persistence can do, though we do so with  heavy hearts.  Lee Kuan Yew once said that, quote, “Anybody who thinks he is a  statesman needs to see a psychiatrist,” but the world lost a great friend and one of  its premier statesmen with his passing earlier this year.  Lee Kuan Yew’s spirit of  statesmanship endures, but perhaps nowhere more than in a room like this.   

 Here men and women of goodwill come together to think critically about the  region’s future.  We owe it to Lee Kuan Yew - who described his leadership style  as, quote, “I set out to do something.  I keep on chasing it until it succeeds” - and  we owe it to all those we represent - citizens, organizations, governments, and  businesses - to work together until we succeed…until every nation can rise...and  everybody wins.  That’s the future we all need to keep chasing.   

 Asia is on the Rise  We’ve succeeded before.  Over the past 70 years, the Asia-Pacific has grown  and prospered in so many ways…Miracle after miracle has occurred:  first Japan,  then Taiwan, South Korea, and Southeast Asia rose and prospered, and now, China  and India are rising and prospering. 

 And the region is not done yet.  Today, over 60 percent of the world’s  population lives in the Asia-Pacific.  It’s the fulcrum of the global economy, one of  the fastest growing regions in the world.  That sustained growth - supported by  increased regional and international trade - has lifted millions out of poverty and  into the middle class.  And even though there’s still room for improvement,  democracy and freedom have spread throughout the region.  

 

 America is too…  Meanwhile, the United States is doing well too.   Following the worst  recession since the Great Depression, the U.S. economy has made great gains - in  both jobs and GDP.  Progress will continue because of America’s dynamic and  innovative businesses, strong commitment to the rule of law, world-class  universities, and the domestic energy revolution now underway.  And the U.S.  military, long the finest fighting force the world has ever known, has improved its  readiness while maintaining its unmatched operational edge and unrivaled  capabilities.   

 EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY -- AS PREPARED/CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

   3 

 America’s rebalance has always been about sustaining the progress  occurring all around the Asia-Pacific and helping the region continue to fulfill its  promise.  As Secretary of Defense, I am personally committed to its next phase, in  which DoD will deepen long-standing alliances and partnerships, diversify  America’s force posture, and make new investments in key capabilities and  platforms.  The Department is investing in the technologies that are most relevant  to this complex security environment, such as new unmanned systems for the air  and sea, a new long-range bomber, and new technologies like the electromagnetic  railgun, lasers, and new systems for space and cyberspace, including a few  surprising ones.   

 As the United States develops new systems, DoD will continue to bring the  best platforms and people forward to the Asia-Pacific, such as the latest Virginia-class submarines, the Navy's P-8 Poseidon surveillance aircraft, the newest stealth  destroyer, the Zumwalt, and brand-new carrier-based E-2D Hawkeye early-warning-and-control aircraft. 

 But the rebalance’s next phase is about more than just security.  The United  States is increasing economic and diplomatic engagement.  The Trans-Pacific  Partnership trade agreement, or TPP, just passed an important milestone in the U.S.  Congress, and when it’s completed, it will unlock tremendous economic  opportunities, not only for the United States, but for countries across the Pacific  Rim.  It will create a diverse network of trade and investment relations driven by  TPP’s high standards, reducing reliance on any one network. Diplomatically,  Secretary Kerry and other members of the Cabinet are making frequent visits to the  region and hosting many of their counterparts this year.  President Obama will  meet a number of Asian leaders at the White House before travelling here again in  November. 

 The entire Obama Administration and many others in Washington - both  Republican and Democrat - are devoted to the rebalance.  The rebalance enjoys  strong, bipartisan support in Congress, as you can see from the large Congressional  delegation joining me here today.  Senators McCain, Reed, Hirono, Ernst, Gardner,  and Sullivan have been leaders on this important national effort.   

 That’s because, for decades upon decades, regardless of what else was going  on, at home or in other parts of the world - during Democratic and Republican  presidencies, in times of surplus and deficit, war and peace - the United States has  stood with its allies and partners and helped maintain peace and stability in the  Asia-Pacific.  And the United States always will.    

 It’s important to remember that America’s rebalance- and our overall and  long-standing strategy to promote an Asia-Pacific regional security architecture  where everyone rises - has never aimed to hold any nation back or push any 

 EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY -- AS PREPARED/CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

   4 

 country down.  The United States wants every nation to have an opportunity to  rise…because it’s good for the region and good for all our countries.     

 Change and Challenges  Indeed, as countries across the Asia-Pacific rise - as nations develop, as  military spending increases, and as economies thrive - we expect to see changes in  how countries define and pursue their interests and ambitions.   

 In addition to those changes, we’ve seen the region’s complex security  environment become more fraught.  North Korea continues to provoke.  Decades-long disputes over rocks and shoals are compounded by quarrels over fishing  rights, energy resources, and freedom of access to international waters and  airspace.  As the challenge of climate change looms larger, natural disasters not  only threaten lives, but also upset trade and economic growth.  And at the same  time, terrorism, foreign fighters, cyberattacks, and trafficking in both people and  narcotics plague this region like any other.     

 A Regional Security Architecture Where Everyone Rises  These challenges risk upsetting the positive trajectory we’re all on…and the  rise of so many in the Asia-Pacific.  That can make it hard to remember our  common interests, but the progress we’ve made, and must continue, demands that  we do so.   

 Unlike elsewhere in the world, the peace in Asia-Pacific has never been  maintained by a region-wide alliance like NATO in Europe.  And that made sense  for the Asia-Pacific, with its unique history, geography, and politics.  Instead,  regional peace, stability, and security have required all of our nations coming  together behind shared interests.   

 We must continue to come together.  Today and in the years ahead, security  must be the shared responsibility of all nations.  With the strengthening of the East  Asia Summit, we have the foundation for a stronger architecture.  It is incumbent  upon all of us to make it better…by reaffirming our long-standing rules and norms,  strengthening our institutions, modernizing alliances, enhancing capabilities, and  improving connectivity.  As President Obama said in Brisbane last year, an  effective security order for Asia must be based - not on spheres of influence, or  coercion, or intimidation where big nations bully the small - but on alliances of  mutual security, international law and international norms, and the peaceful  resolution of disputes. 

 

 Reaffirming Rules & Norms  First, we must all reaffirm the guiding principles and rules that have served  this region so well.  Disputes should be resolved peacefully…through diplomacy, 

 EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY -- AS PREPARED/CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

   5 

 not aggression or intimidation.  All countries should have the right to freedom of  navigation and overflight so global commerce can continue unimpeded.  And all  nations should be able to make their own security and economic choices free from  coercion.   

 These are the rights of all nations.  They are not abstractions, nor are they  subject to the whims of any one country.  They are not privileges to be granted or  withdrawn by any country.  These rules make sense: they’ve worked, and they can  continue to help all our nations rise - as long as we reinforce them instead of  putting them at risk.     

 Strengthening Institutions  Second, we must strengthen regional institutions.  The nations of ASEAN  have laid the foundation for the architecture in Southeast Asia that we enjoy today,  and ASEAN will continue to be central to it. 

 That’s why the United States and the Department of Defense are making an  affirmative investment of time, resources, and engagement in ASEAN.  That’s why  America has committed to sending a new U.S. Defense Advisor to augment the  U.S. Mission to ASEAN in order to improve coordination and information sharing  for humanitarian and disaster response and maritime security.  That’s also why I  plan to travel to Malaysia in November for this year’s ADMM-Plus meeting,  

 As ASEAN works to build its community in the years ahead, the United  States encourages member countries to continue to seek out new and innovative  ways to work together and pool resources to maintain regional security.    

 Modernizing Alliances and Partnerships  Third, America’s alliances and partnerships have been the bedrock of peace  and stability in the Asia-Pacific for decades.    And the United States is working with allies like Australia, Japan, the  Republic of Korea, Thailand, and the Philippines to be sure they continue to serve  that function.  Modernization means changing these alliances to address the  evolving threat environment as the United States has done with South Korea and  growing these alliances into platforms for regional and global cooperation, as  we’ve done with Australia and Japan. 

 Under Prime Minister Abe, Japan is increasing its engagement in Southeast  Asia.  Through the recently updated Guidelines for U.S.-Japan Defense  Cooperation, the United States and Japan will be able to do more as an alliance in  the region and beyond.  Forward-stationing America’s most advanced capabilities  in Japan - such as the Global Hawk long-range surveillance drone, AEGIS  ballistic-missile-defense destroyers, and the recently announced CV-22 Osprey -  will further enable rapid and allied responses to regional emergencies.   

 EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY -- AS PREPARED/CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

   6 

 Meanwhile the U.S.-Korea alliance not only assures deterrence and stability  on the Korean Peninsula; it increasingly works for the region as well.  And in  Australia, U.S. and Australian forces now train side-by-side not only with each  other as they have for many years, but also with friends and partners across  Southeast Asia.   

 Beyond alliances, the United States is also deepening its partnerships with  friends across the region, including India, and Vietnam, where, as I said, I will  travel next week.  The United States is looking for new ways to complement  India’s Act East policy and find meaningful areas of cooperation in the Asia-Pacific.  And the 2015 U.S.-India Defense Framework I will sign next week will  open up this relationship on everything from maritime security to aircraft carrier  and jet engine technology cooperation.   

 We’re leveraging America’s alliances and partnerships to pursue new forms  of cooperation and that is why America’s trilateral networks are blossoming.  With  Japan and Australia, the United States is strengthening maritime security in  Southeast Asia, expanding trilateral exercises, and exploring defense technology  cooperation.  With Japan and Korea, the United States is building on a first-of-its-kind information-sharing arrangement that will help collectively deter and respond  to crises.  And with Japan and India, the United States is sharing lessons learned on  disaster responses and building greater maritime security cooperation.  

 

 Enhancing Security Capabilities  Fourth, in addition to strengthening relationships, we must enhance the  capabilities of the regional security architecture, particularly on maritime security.    American men and women in uniform are working together with countries in  the region to build capacity - especially on maritime security.    

 For example, the U.S.S. Fort Worth, one of the Navy’s nimble littoral  combat ships, just returned from a regional tour, where it was welcomed  everywhere from South Korea to Southeast Asia.  And Singapore’s willingness to  host LCS ships like the Fort Worth helps all of us respond more quickly and  effectively to regional crises.  For example, when Air Asia Flight 8501 disappeared  this past winter, the Fort Worth was able to be on the scene within 24 hours to help  with search and recovery.   

 We’re doing even more together.  In Vietnam, where I will travel next, the  United States is providing equipment and infrastructure support to the Vietnamese  coast guard.  Just this month in Malaysia, the U.S.S. Carl Vinson carrier strike  group participated in air combat training with Malaysian air and surface units.  In  the Philippines, the United States is helping to build a National Coast Watch  System to improve Manila’s maritime domain awareness.  And in Indonesia,  America recently began conducting sea surveillance exercises together, which 

 EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY -- AS PREPARED/CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

   7 

 included, for the first time this year, flight portions over the South China Sea...   And that’s just a start.  Today, I am pleased to announce that DoD will be  launching a new Southeast Asia Maritime Security Initiative.  And thanks to the  leadership of the Senators here today and others, Congress has taken steps to  authorize up to $425 million dollars for these maritime capacity-building efforts.     

 Building Habits of Cooperation  And fifth, to ensure that our institutions, alliances, partnerships, and capacity  building efforts meet their potential, we must be better connected.  We can  accomplish this by working together, communicating better, and developing habits  of cooperation.   

 Every year the United States helps plan and host hundreds of exercises and  engagements in the region.  From Foal Eagle to Balikatan, from Malabar to  Garuda Shield, from Talisman Sabre to Cobra Gold, with every engagement we  get smarter and more effective, while decreasing the risk of misinterpretation and  miscalculation.   

 We can also limit that risk by improving communication.  For example, the  United States and China have agreed to two historic confidence-building  agreements this past fall, and the United States hopes to do more.  We’re working  to complete another measure this year that aims to prevent dangerous air-to-air  encounters.  Building better habits of U.S.-China military-to-military cooperation  not only benefits both countries but the whole region as well.  

 Beyond exercises and military-to-military cooperation, we also build habits  of cooperation when we work together to confront real world challenges, such as  responding to natural disasters and other humanitarian crises.   These efforts are critically important in a disaster-prone region.  Just a few  weeks ago, the United States worked together with partners to respond to Nepal’s  tragic earthquake, with U.S. Marines, based in Okinawa, helping alongside India,  Japan, Thailand, China, and others.  And we don’t just work together.  We sacrifice  together.  Tragically, six U.S. Marines and two Nepalese soldiers perished when  their helicopter went missing in the mountains during relief operations.  Their loss  will not be forgotten.  Together we can honor their memory by continuing the work  they began.   

 America has been here, after typhoons, earthquakes, and plane crashes…  and America will keep being here…committed to the long-standing practice of  playing a part, a pivotal part, in assuring safety and stability in the region.   We face another humanitarian crisis today.  As we speak, an urgent refugee  situation is unfolding in the Bay of Bengal that requires both a comprehensive  solution and quick action to save lives.  I want to commend Malaysia’s leadership,  as well as Indonesia, Thailand, and others, who are working along with the United 

 EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY -- AS PREPARED/CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

   8 

 States, to locate the migrants and prepare search and rescue operations.    These humanitarian efforts, and the habits of cooperation they help form,  demonstrate what we can do when we work together.  Working together, as we  have in Nepal, in the fight against piracy, and in preventing illegal trafficking and  fishing in the Gulf of Thailand - just to name a few examples - allows us do more  and do better around the region.  That’s how we reach the future a stronger security  architecture affords…a future where everyone continues to rise.    

 South China Sea   To realize that future, we must tackle urgent issues like the security and  stability of the South China Sea.   Yesterday, I took an aerial transit of the Strait of Malacca.  And when  viewed from the air, it is even clearer how critical this region’s waterways are to  international trade and energy resources.  We all have benefitted from free and  open access to the South China Sea and the Strait of Malacca.  We all have a  fundamental stake in the security of the South China Sea.  And that’s why we all  have deep concerns about any party that attempts to undermine the status quo and  generate instability there, whether by force, coercion, or simply by creating  irreversible facts on the ground, in the air, or in the water.   

 Now, it’s true that almost all the nations that claim parts of the South China  Sea have developed outposts over the years…of differing scope and degree.  In the  Spratly Islands, Vietnam has 48 outposts; the Philippines, eight; Malaysia, five;  and Taiwan, one.   

 Yet, one country has gone much farther and much faster than any other.   And that’s China.  China has reclaimed over 2,000 acres, more than all other claimants  combined…and more than in the entire history of the region.  And China did so in  only the last 18 months.  It is unclear how much farther China will go.  That is why  this stretch of water has become the source of tension in the region and front-page  news around the world.  

 The United States is deeply concerned about the pace and scope of land  reclamation in the South China Sea, the prospect of further militarization, as well  as the potential for these activities to increase the risk of miscalculation or conflict  among claimant states.  As a Pacific nation, a trading nation, and a member of the  international community, the United States has every right to be involved and be  concerned.  But these are not just American concerns.  Nations across the region  and the world, many of you here in the room today, have also voiced the same  concerns and raised questions about China’s intentions in constructing these  massive outposts. 

 So let me make clear the position of the United States: 

 EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY -- AS PREPARED/CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

   9 

 First, we want a peaceful resolution of all disputes.  To that end, there should  be an immediate and lasting halt to land reclamation by all claimants.  We also  oppose any further militarization of disputed features.  We all know there is no  military solution to the South China Sea disputes.   Right now, at this critical  juncture, is the time for renewed diplomacy, focused on a finding a lasting solution  that protects the rights and interests of all.  As it is central to the regional security  architecture, ASEAN must be part of this effort: the United States encourages  ASEAN and China to conclude a Code of Conduct this year.  And America will  support the right of claimants to pursue international legal arbitration and other  peaceful means to resolve these disputes, just as we will oppose coercive tactics.   

 Second, the United States will continue to protect freedom of navigation and  overflight - principles that have ensured security and prosperity in this region for  decades.  There should be no mistake: the United States will fly, sail, and operate  wherever international law allows, as U.S. forces do all around the world.   America, alongside its allies and partners in the regional architecture, will not be  deterred from exercising these rights - the rights of all nations.  After all, turning  an underwater rock into an airfield simply does not afford the rights of sovereignty  or permit restrictions on international air or maritime transit. 

 Finally, with its actions in the South China Sea, China is out of step with  both the international rules and norms that underscore the Asia-Pacific’s security  architecture, and the regional consensus that favors diplomacy and opposes  coercion.  These actions are spurring nations to respond together in new ways: in  settings as varied as the East Asia Summit to the G-7, countries are speaking up for  the importance of stability in the South China Sea.  Indonesia and the Philippines  are putting aside maritime disputes and resolving their claims peacefully.  And in  venues like the ADMM-Plus and the East Asia Maritime Forum, nations are  seeking new protocols and procedures to build maritime cooperation.     

 The United States will always stand with its allies and partners.  It’s  important for the region to understand that America is going to remain  engaged…continue to stand up for international law and universal principles…and  help provide security and stability in the Asia-Pacific for decades to come.     

 Conclusion  The South China Sea is just one issue we will face as the Asia-Pacific  continues to rise and prosper.  There will surely be others.  We cannot predict what  challenges the future holds, but we do know how we can work to ensure the peace  and prosperity of the region, and the opportunity to rise for all nations and all  people… we must do so together.   

 That’s what is happening across the region right now.  We come together on  a daily basis to settle disputes, respond to crises, and prevent conflict.  For 

 EMBARGOED UNTIL DELIVERY -- AS PREPARED/CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

   10 

 example, in the Bay of Bengal, India and Bangladesh have proven that diplomacy  can work in resolving maritime differences.  In Southeast Asia, nations like  Singapore, Vietnam, and Malaysia are developing new training facilities that will  build regional capacity in peacekeeping, disaster relief, and counter-terrorism.   And in the Indian Ocean, many nations, including China, are rooting out the  scourge of piracy.   

 But we all know we have more work to do.   And by taking steps now to  ensure the regional architecture that has reinforced norms, stronger institutions and  alliances, more capabilities, and deeper connectivity, we can ensure our successors  at the Shangri-La Dialogue in twenty years will be talking about the challenges and  opportunities presented by the rise of yet other Asia-Pacific nations.  But I hope  they’ll also be busy discussing, perhaps, the latest U.S.-China-India multilateral  maritime exercise…or new rules for cyberspace that assure the free flow of  information and commerce…or ways to further improve disaster response.   

 If those are the conversations at Shangri-La 2035, we will have succeeded.   We will still face challenges and crises…but we will face them together, with a  regional security architecture where everyone rises.  And that will be a worthy  legacy.  

 Thank you.  

 # # # 

