---
title: "Greens announce the real opposition for North Sydney by-election"
date: "2015-10-29"
creators:
  - "Rhiannon, Lee"
  - "Chesterfield-Evans, Arthur"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/218098259
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4163168%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE  29 October 2015   

 Greens announce the real opposition for North Sydney by-election   

 Practising doctor, former MP and anti-smoking health advocate Dr Arthur Chesterfield-Evans will stand for the Greens in the North Sydney by-election on December 5th.   

 "The Greens are the only party that has a positive vision for the future and will work for  real action on climate change, investment in public education and to clean up  corruption," said Dr Chesterfield-Evans.   

 "Australia must show its compassion to refugees by offering protection rather than  making a bad situation worse by dropping bombs or going to war.   

 "My plans for the local community include protecting the North Sydney TAFE, reopening  the public local schools, keeping public housing safe and accessible and protecting the  remaining parts of the foreshore from over-development.   

 "As a doctor I have seen the impact of Liberal Government service cuts on those who  can least afford to bear them. It is already clear that the Turnbull Government are  continuing some of the worst policies of the Abbott Government, particularly for public  services and the environment.   

 "The people of North Sydney deserve a real alternative. At this election they can use  their vote to send a strong message that they want a government that cares for people  and the environment," said Dr Chesterfield-Evans.   

 Greens NSW Senator Lee Rhiannon congratulated Dr Chesterfield-Evans on his  preselection.   

 "Arthur has been a strong public voice for health, innovation and progressive social  policy. He brings a wealth of experience to the table, both as a former MP and in his  background as a medical doctor and widely respected public health advocate," said  Senator Rhiannon.   

 "I worked with Arthur when we were both MPs in the NSW Upper House. We worked  together to stop the corrupting influence that political donations were having on the NSW  planning process.   

 "Arthur offers an alternative voice to counter the Liberals' lack of action on climate  change, marriage equality and refugees.   

 "Voters in North Sydney can use this election to send a clear message to Prime Minister  Malcolm Turnbull that his policies run counter to building a fair Australia and protecting  the environment," said Senator Rhiannon.   

 Contact  Dr Arthur Chesterfield-Evans  - 0419 428 019  Brami Jegan for Lee Rhiannon - 0433 054 712 

