---
title: "Giving asylum seekers work rights while they wait 3+ years is a no-brainer"
date: "2015-04-13"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211535969
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3770184%22
---

 The Australian Greens   

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Monday, 13 April 2015   

 Giving asylum seekers work rights while they wait 3+ years is a no-brainer   

 Giving asylum seekers already living in the community work rights, while they wait at least three years  for their refugee applications to be processed, must be a priority for the Immigration Minister, the  Australia Greens have said today.     

 "Asylum seekers living in the community should have the right to work and study, allowing them to  provide for themselves and contribute to the economy,’ Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.    

 "Putting these people to work or study rather than leaving them to sit around for three years with  nothing to do is a no-brainer.      

 "I will move in the Senate next month to grant thousands of asylum seekers work and study rights, I urge  the Government to support the move.     

 "Work rights are currently not allowed for asylum seekers unless the Minister gives his personal  approval. This is simply unworkable and cumbersome, leaving thousands of people who want to work  without the opportunity to go and get a job.    

 "Despite promising the Senate and Coalition backbenchers last year that asylum seekers on bridging  visas would be given work rights, very few people have been granted access to the workforce. This is  just another broken promise from this Government.   

 "The Minister has said today that it will take ‘at least three years' before 24,000 asylum seekers living in  the community will have their refugee claims processed. Three years is a long time to be living in limbo  with no work or study rights.     

 "Today's admission of an increase in processing times for refugee applications is an obvious attempt by  the Minister to soften the ground for a blow out in his department’s budget, come May.   

 "If the Minster is worried about the budget cost of his department he should let the 25,000 people on  bridging visas work, allowing them to pay their own way and start paying taxes.    

 Media Contact: Ali Neyle Media 0427 604 760   

