---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Adelaide: 20 May 2015: Labor's plan to create the jobs of the future: investing in STEM; Labor's plan for coding in schools; budget 2015; inquiry into iron ore; asylum seekers; live cattle industry"
date: "2015-05-20"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Labor's plan to create the jobs of the future: investing in STEM"
  - "Labor's plan for coding in schools"
  - "budget 2015"
  - "inquiry into iron ore"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "live cattle industry"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211864108
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3844124%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  ADELAIDE  WEDNESDAY, 20 MAY 2015   

 SUBJECT/S: Labor’s plan to create the jobs of the future: Investing in STEM;  Labor’s plan for coding in schools; Budget 2015; Inquiry into iron ore; Asylum  seekers; Live cattle industry   

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: It’s great to be here at Hamilton  Secondary College where we’re seeing great students and great teachers learning  the skills they need for the jobs of the future. I should say it’s also great to be here  with Kate Ellis, this is Kate's first formal engagement since the arrival of baby  Samuel, so it’s great to have Kate talking about the important issues of jobs for the  future. We visited three different classrooms where we saw year 10 and year 11  students falling in love with the subjects which will generate them the jobs of the  future, learning the skills which all parents know that our young people need to have  in order to be able to compete in the future with the rest of the world.    

 Labor's Budget Reply last Thursday night was all about a plan for jobs of the future.  Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey's Budget was all about a plan for themselves in the  short-term. We need to be investing in coding and teaching our children the  computational thinking and computer skills that we will need in the future to make  Australia competitive. We also need to be investing in our universities, and our  research, and our start-ups to make sure that Australia’s children get the best start in  life for the jobs of the future. I might ask Kate Ellis to talk a bit more about the Budget  and the contrasting approaches in terms of South Australia.   

 KATE ELLIS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION: Well thank you very much  Bill and thank you so much to the staff and students at Hamilton Secondary College  for welcoming us here today and for showing us the great job that they’re doing in  teaching science and technology. We have seen time and time again that the South 

 Australian Liberals do not care about our jobs. That's why it’s so great to have Bill  here today showing that Federal Labor will make sure that we invest in the skills for  tomorrow's jobs. We will make sure that South Australian students today and  tomorrow have the skills to go on and work in advanced manufacturing and that we 

 make sure that South Australian students don't need to look away, don't need to look  interstate, but can have the skills that they need for the local industries. We also  know that we need to be investing not just in students and in the teaching of science  and technology but also in teachers, in making sure that they've got the skills and  qualifications to really enrich the lives of these students and help them in their  learning and development. That's why it’s been so fantastic to see Hamilton leading  the way but what we in Federal Labor want to make sure is that every school in  every state in Australia can have a great focus on science and technology and that  Australian students will be equipped to compete on an international stage.   

 SHORTEN: Thanks Kate. Are there any questions?   

 JOURNALIST: Regarding the asylum seeker crisis in the Andaman Sea, should  Australia get involved and should we be offering temporary or permanent  resettlement?   

 SHORTEN: Well first of all, the Opposition would like to be briefed by the  Government about what's exactly happening. Secondly, we believe that Australia  should always be part of regional solutions but beyond that we’ll have to wait and  see the detail which the Government can provide the Opposition.   

 JOURNALIST: There’s a regional meeting next week, should the Government send  a Minister rather than leaving it to the Ambassador?   

 SHORTEN: Well the Australian Government should be represented. Again, the  Government just should be clear about what's actually happening and tell Australians  when it comes to refugees, no Australian wants to see people suffering, and the  Government just needs to make clear what its plan is.   

 JOURNALIST: What position would you like to see the Government taking at this  meeting next week?   

 SHORTEN: Well first of all, the Opposition needs to be briefed by the Government .  We say to the Government we’re always prepared to be bipartisan on these very  important international matters but it’s important that they talk to people and explain  what's going on and what their proposals are.   

 JOURNALIST: Does the Opposition support sending four refugees to Cambodia for  permanent resettlement?   

 SHORTEN: Again what we see here is the Government does everything under a  cloak of secrecy, we have to make sure that the deal stacks up, not only in terms of  people’s safety but in terms of the cost and what it all means, so again what we need  the Government to do, is to make sure they take the people of Australia into their  confidence.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you blame Tony Abbott’s turn back the boats policy for what’s  happening in South East Asia right now?   

 SHORTEN: I think some of the inter-communal violence which might be happening  in - which is happening in Myanmar, I don't blame the Government for that. Some of 

 these issues and conflicts far pre-date the existence of the Commonwealth of  Australia.   

 JOURNALIST: But the policy to actually turn the boats around, do you think they are  mimicking what Tony Abbott's policy is in Australia?   

 SHORTEN: Well again, I think there’s a number of issues and the question you  raise. One is, and I think the most important matter is where you have inter-communal violence where some people feel they have to leave their homes because  they’re not safe, that's the source of these troubles, and again we say to the  Government, just talk to people, bring Australians into your confidence, you always  get a better result.   

 JOURNALIST: But do you think that the decision to turn around boats in South East  Asia is a by-product of Tony Abbott's policy?   

 SHORTEN: I think the issue of refugees and inter-communal violence, where the  Rohingya people are getting persecuted, that is an issue which well predates the  Abbott Government and these are issues which go back centuries. 

 

 JOURNALIST: So will Labor then be happy to adopt this policy?   

 SHORTEN: Well in terms of dealing with the Rohingya conflict and refugees?   

 JOURNALIST: In regards to turning boats around as I was asking you.   

 SHORTEN: Well no, we were talking about the inter-communal violence, and we see  the deplorable situation and the treatment of Rohingya minorities. Those issues are  deep-seated. In terms of Australia's approach in terms of asylum seekers, we  fundamentally believe in a regional approach, we do support regional settlement. 

 

 JOURNALIST: So do you support turning boats around?   

 SHORTEN: Well Labor’s the one who’s put regional settlement on the map in terms  of a policy. Our approach is defined by, we want to see refugees treated well, we  want to make sure that people aren't drowning at sea and we also want to make sure  that Australia's immigration policies are respected.   

 JOURNALIST: Reports of Australian cattle being bludgeoned to death in Vietnam,  should there be a halt to live exports as the Labor Government did with Indonesia?   

 SHORTEN: Well first of all, let's talk about the actual reports. I have seen some of  the still photos. They are shocking and they are horrible. I think all Australians will be  outraged when they see these photos. This shouldn't be happening. We’d call upon  Barnaby Joyce to not be missing in action on this matter. Specifically, Barnaby Joyce  was all over Jonny Depp's dogs in terms of saying what should happen to these two  dogs which came to Australia, but why is he not saying anything about these  shocking images, which we’re all seeing in the Australian media now. I don't believe  the trade should automatically be suspended, no I don’t, but what I do believe is that  the Minister should be making sure that we’re auditing the markets where we’re 

 sending the cattle to, we should be making sure that we punish where we see these  breaches.   

 JOURNALIST: Going back to border protection sorry, should we be using our border  protection assets in Asia, should we be offering them to help with the crisis over  there right now?   

 SHORTEN: Well again going back to the first answer I gave and subsequent  answers, the Opposition needs to be briefed by the Government about the extent of  the problem. We’re willing to sit down and work with the Government. No-one wants 

 to see people in distress anywhere in the world.   

 JOURNALIST: This year's Budget has been much better received compared to last  year’s, is it harder for Labor to fight it?   

 SHORTEN: Well first of all, last year's Budget was such a shocker, that it’s -  anything with a pulse would do better than last year's Budget. But let’s be also  straight here, last year’s unfairness has been rebadged in this one. There are  currently as we speak Government measures which will increase the cost of  prescription drugs in the Senate. This is a Government who’s persisting with their  $100,000 degrees, and they’re also persisting with attacks on family payments which  will see families on $60,000 losing up to $6,000 per year.    

 So this Government is still perpetuating unfairness, and in terms of last year's  Budget and this year's Budget, I don't think any Australian believes that if Tony  Abbott could control the Senate of Australia - I mean we know which Budget he'd  pick, it’s last year's Budget. This Government hasn't changed its mind, it’s just  changed its tactics, and furthermore this Budget doesn't deal with the long-term  issues about building infrastructure or skilling our young people for the jobs of the  future.   

 JOURNALIST: I understand that the Maritime Union in Sydney will be holding a  protest today regarding some potential restructures on the waterfront. Anthony  Albanese’s come out this morning and basically suggested it could be Work Choices  on the water, I mean what's your response to this?   

 SHORTEN: Well let's not use weasel words about restructure on water, this is Work  Choices on water. What we see is thousands of Australian jobs to be jeopardised.  What we see is this Government's predilection for lowering employment conditions in  Australia. What this Government hopes is that because ships are beyond the  breakers and that people can't see every employment condition in a ship, that they  can get away with seeing third world conditions employed on ships which carry cargo  around the Australian shoreline. This is unacceptable, Australia is an island nation,  we should have our own indigenous shipping industry, and for the Abbott  Government to sabotage the conditions of seafarers is Work Choices on water.   

 JOURNALIST: Why won't Labor back Nick Xenophon's push for an inquiry into iron  ore prices?   

 SHORTEN: Well I think that it’s become Tony Abbott's inquiry.    

 Last Friday Tony Abbott said in answer to a question by Alan Jones that yes he did  want an iron ore inquiry.    

 Labor's concern is not the issue of the inquiry, our concern is jobs. There’s been tens  of thousands of people, not just in the mining companies directly but in a lot of the  services companies, who’ve lost their jobs. The Abbott Government’s been asleep at  the wheel in terms of jobs, and finding new jobs for these hard working people.    

 In terms of the iron ore inquiry itself, I do have grave reservations. First of all, the  idea that somehow this inquiry is going to change the prices in the iron ore industry  will just play into the hands of competitor nations who will be rushing off to our  customers who buy our iron ore and saying ‘oh you can't deal with Australia with  Tony Abbott because they’re going to try and do things about raising prices for iron  ore’. And then what will happen is, we will lose market share and even further jobs,  and if the inquiry isn't about the prices in iron ore, then why on earth are they having  it? If there has been any inappropriate commercial behaviour, Tony Abbott is well  advised to consider the ACCC. I do not understand for the life of me why an iron ore  industry battered and bruised should now be subject to this uncertainty. So we do  have real reservations about the purpose and outcome of this inquiry. For us, the  real question here is impact on jobs. That's who Labor are. So we’re interested in  working through with the industry and Tony Abbott about how we find new jobs for  the people displaced by the fall in iron ore prices, but we’re not interested in  wrecking the iron ore industry further.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you think that Australia needs to convene a regional summit on  the boats issue in South East Asia?   

 SHORTEN: Well I think it’s always important that Australia is an active regional  citizen in terms of how we handle the flow of refugees.   

 JOURNALIST: I’ve asked you several questions about Labor’s policy on turning  around boats and you’ve dodged around it the whole time. Does Labor actually have  a policy on this?   

 SHORTEN: Well you’ve asked several questions to do with the refugee crisis, and  you’ve said well what would we do, and we’ve said back every time to your question  is the Government should talk to us about what they have in mind to help this latest  refugee tragedy of the Rohingya people. These conflicts go back a long time, I'm not  blaming the Government for these conflicts. These solutions to these issues are  complex and they require a regional approach. Labor has always supported a  regional approach to deal with the issue of refugees.   

 JOURNALIST: And where does it stand on turning around boats?   

 SHORTEN: Well first of all, we need to see what the policies are in terms of how  they've been working, in terms of regional approaches and attitudes to this. We are  the ones who pioneered having regional resettlement but again, what I would say to  the Government is sit down and talk to us about this latest refugee crisis and  tragedy. Are there any other questions?   

 JOURNALIST: Back to the Budget, it has been 100 days since Tony Abbott  promised to deliver a good government. He seems to be doing that. What does this  mean for the Opposition?   

 SHORTEN: It has been about 640 days since they got elected. I'm amazed that we  have a Prime Minister of Australia who woke up halfway through his term and  conceded there hadn't been a good government. Now I don't think this is a good  Budget, I think it’s a hoax Budget. It relies on maintaining the old unfairnesses of the  last Budget plus some new unfairnesses, and let’s face it, haven't this Government  got themselves into a mess over their backflips on paid parental leave? I think it is  unimaginable - to me it’s unimaginable that we’ve got the leaders of Australia paying  out and attacking working women who’ve negotiated employment conditions on top  of the minimum standard of the paid parental leave scheme supported by the  Government, and they're attacking working women for negotiating conditions which  would see them be able to spend a few more weeks with their children before they  return to work. So there’s new and old unfairness. There’s still the attacks on family  payments but it also relies upon on $80 billion worth of cuts to the States and  Territories.    

 I understand why South Australians in particular are outraged at Tony Abbott and  Joe Hockey. I mean there’s $3.7 billion being cut from hospitals in the next number  of years from South Australian hospitals, $2.2 billion from schools. The kids in this  school that we’re visiting expect the adults and the people in Parliament to be as  brave and optimistic in planning for the future as they are through their own efforts.  And of course what we see is this Government doing is relying on the lazy hand of  inflation, as wages go up, to move people into higher tax brackets and see them  taking more tax income from working Australians. This is lazy Budget, and Labor  instead has proposed the start of directions for the future of Australia which is, where  will the jobs come from, and Labor is saying let's make our kids as competitive in the  world with what they learn as the rest of the world. Thanks everyone.   

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053   

