---
title: "Australian citizens' safety must come before agreeing to an intake of 12,000 Syrian refugees"
date: "2015-11-17"
creators:
  - "Lambie, Jacqui"
source: "Office of LAMBIE, SEN JACQUI"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/219599577
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4202543%22
---

 

 Austral

 Independ refugees slaughte

 “Australia State spo France - against t

 While I d helped Is do not ha Lambie. 

 ian Citizens

 dent Senato s, including th r in Paris. 

 an Citizens’  onsored or in - but also in  hat fact.” sa

 on’t agree w slamic State  ave religious

 s’ Safety mu

 r for Tasman he proposed

 safety must  nspired terro other weste id Senator L

 with Presiden increase its s tests for ou

  Med

 1

 ust come fir Refug

 nia, Jacqui L d 12,000 from

 always com or attacks, th rn countries  Lambie. 

 nt Obama on s power and  ur compassio

 ia Statemen

 17.11.15 

 

 rst before a gees: Lamb

 

 Lambie calle m Syria follo

 me first - and hat the refug including A

 n many matt influence) h on” when ve

 nt 

 agreeing to  bie 

 ed for better  owing the lat

 d it’s clear by gee vetting p ustralia. No-

 ters (I believ however, I do etting prospe

 

 an intake o

 scrutiny and test Islamic e

 y the succes process has  -one can rat

 ve his weak l o agree with ective citizen

 of 12,000 Sy

 d vetting of a extremist 

 ss of Islamic not only faile tionally argue

 leadership h h his call that ns.” said Sen

 yrian 

 all 

 c 

 ed in  e 

 has  t “We  nator 

 “Australia should never discriminate on the basis of religion. But we do have the right and duty  to discriminate on the basis of whether prospective citizens will accept and uphold our  democratic culture, values, constitution and Australian laws.” said Senator Lambie. 

 “Therefore, a key test of whether people are worthy of our compassion and are suitable for  Australian citizenship will be their opposition to Sharia or the terrorists’ law. Anyone who  supports or advocates for the law of the terrorists must be, at the very least - suspected of being  at risk of radicalisation and sympathetic to the Islamic State terrorists’ barbaric world view.” said  Senator Lambie. 

 “Islamic State wants to impose Sharia Law on the world. One of the first tests to judge whether  a refugee or a citizen is loyal to Australian democratic values and our Constitution is to ask  whether they support Sharia Law (the law of the terrorists) or do they support Australian law? 

 You can’t support both Sharia Law and Australian Law. Your allegiance is either to the  Terrorists and their law or Australia and our law. You either accept that women and gay people  have the right to vote and love who they please - as we do under Australian law - or you  support Sharia Law, which discriminates against and allows state sanctioned harm to women  and gay people - if they are deemed by religious leaders to have broken the law of their god. 

 If we’re going to try to keep the Middle East madness out of Australia and protect our citizens -  then we must ban those who support Sharia Law from entering the country and becoming  Australian Citizens.” Said Senator Lambie. 

 Contact 0407 904 134 

 

