---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne: 1 July 2015: Abbott Government's GP tax by stealth; national security; superannuation; immigration; Australian Border Force"
date: "2015-07-01"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Abbott Government's GP tax by stealth"
  - "national security"
  - "superannuation"
  - "immigration"
  - "Australian Border Force"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/212594246
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3927298%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG    

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  MELBOURNE  WEDNESDAY, 1 JULY 2015  SUBJECT/S: Abbott Government’s GP Tax by stealth; National Security;  Superannuation; Immigration; Australian Border Force   

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everyone and  welcome to one of Australia's great research institutes, the Baker IDI Research  Institute. Today I've been privileged to meet with researchers, scientists, leaders  in medical research in Australia, who are tackling some of the most important  and challenging diseases that Australians have to deal with, from heart disease  to diabetes. Australians should be very grateful for the work that is performed  here because it is going to save lives and improve the quality of life for millions of  Australians in the future. 

 

 That's why Labor's policy of putting science and research at the forefront of  national political debate is so important. In the Budget Reply speech I outlined  that Labor will ensure that children learn the language of the future, which is  coding, computational thinking. It's most important we prepare our young people  for the jobs of the future, that's why we've also said that we will put forward  100,000 places over the next 5 years for people who complete their science,  technology, engineering and mathematics degrees, they will have to pay  no HECS. We're also proposing to put more skilled people into teaching, 25,000  more skilled teachers and we also want to support existing teachers to retrain  and requalify in terms of their knowledge. 

 

 So that's what Labor's got. We've got a plan for the jobs of the future. But of  course, one of the big problems that Australians have woken up today with, is  that we can do all the good things about the jobs of the future, supporting  medical research, but today Australians are waking up and they will discover that  Mr Abbott has introduced a GP Tax by stealth. A GP Tax by the back door. 

 Specifically what happens from 1 July, is all of our hard working GP surgeries  right around Australia, from the big cities to country towns are going to have an  indexation freeze in terms of the costs of what they do. Or put bluntly, what's  going to happen is that our GPs are going to be expected to do more with less  support from the Government. 

 

 The Medical Journal of Australia, a very reputable independent journal, has  observed that the Abbott Government's GP Tax by stealth, their GP Tax by the  back door, is going to cost doctors up to $8.43 and what we'll see per visit is and  what we will see in the next four years is patients are going to have to pay more  to go to see the doctor. This is the real problem. Mr Abbott has broken his  election promise from two years ago. He said there'd be no changes to health.  Every Australian going to the doctor is now going to have to pay more to go and  see the doctor. This will discourage people taking care of their primary health and  going to the doctor when they need to. Poorer people will simply put off going to  the doctor, and it's going to put a lot more strain on the cost of living of working  families, and of course, the GPs, the doctors, the front line of our medical system  are caught between the two. You have a government who's decreasing funding  to health care and you have patients who need help. So today, Labor again says  we are bitterly opposed to what the Abbott Government's doing, forcing GPs to  increase the cost of going to see a doctor. Happy to take any questions.   

 JOURNALIST: There's been an opinion piece saying that the Prime Minister is  using a fear campaign on terror to distract from the economy. Do you agree with  that?   

 SHORTEN: Well when it comes to terror and national security, Labor does  support a constructive and consistent approach. But Labor is also very  concerned that the Government has not got an economic plan for the future.  They've brought down a Budget two months ago or a month and a half ago which  won't last 12 months. We've got unemployment with a 6 in front of it. The  Government's doubled the deficit in the last 12 months. Business confidence and  consumer confidence is down. So there is some, sort of, tough prospects in the  economy coming up in the future and we don't have a Government who's got a  plan, instead all they want to do is today increase the cost of going to the doctor.  The only proposition Mr Abbott is offering Australians is that the only way he can  fix his Budget is by hurting families' budgets and that includes increasing the cost  of going to see the doctor.    

 JOURNALIST: Will the Labor Party support boat turnbacks?   

 SHORTEN: In terms of refugees, Labor has a compassionate and constructive  approach. Labor fundamentally believes that this nation should be  compassionate to genuine refugees. That is why we're supporting regional  resettlement. We want to also make sure that people coming to Australia don't do  so in manners which are unsafe by paying criminal people smugglers lots of 

 money to potentially drown at sea. Labor is determined to stop the people  smugglers' model, that's why we introduced regional resettlement and we are  most determined that people smugglers can never get back into the evil trade of  allowing vulnerable people to pay them tens of thousands of dollars and then  these people get on unsafe boats and drown between Java and Christmas  Island. So Labor's approach is compassionate and constructive.   

 JOURNALIST: What's your response to the strike at Melbourne Airport today?    

 SHORTEN: I haven't heard any report about that matter.    

 JOURNALIST: You've received FOI documents that show the Government was  considering changes to super taxes before you did. Do you think they should now  adopt your plan?    

 SHORTEN: I think that Mr Abbott and the Government need to stop playing  politics with the future of Australia's jobs and the future of Australia's economy.  Labor's put forward sensible ideas to rein in some of the excessive taxpayer-funded concessions which are going to a few tens of thousands of people who  already have millions and millions of dollars in their superannuation. This is  important. What's interesting about the FOI documents this morning is this is a  government who given a choice between policy and politics, always chooses  politics. What this FOI shows is that the Government was willing to consider  tackling this runaway tax concession at the top end for people who don't need an  excessive tax concession, but as soon as Labor said we think this is a good idea  to tackle it, the Government always go in the opposite direction. The Government  needs to learn not to just oppose ideas that the Opposition puts forward  especially when our ideas are in the national interest.   

 JOURNALIST: Does there need to be broader reform of the tax system so  people aren't trying to stash all their money in super?   

 SHORTEN: Well we encourage people to save for their superannuation. We  recognise that people work hard their whole lives and Labor has always  supported compulsory savings for retirement but the superannuation system was  never designed to provide tax-free income for people who are already  multimillionaires. What Labor wants to see is most Australians get to a  comfortable level in their superannuation balance, but what we don't want to see  is few thousand very lucky Australians who are already very well off being  subsidised to have tax-free income for piles of money which run into the  multimillions of dollars. In terms of tax reform more generally it is always an  important issue, Labor is always willing to work with the Government on sensible  ideas for tax reform. People are sick of the tit for tat, negative politics. What  Labor is prepared to do and what we've been doing is when the government has  a good idea, we will back it in and when they have a bad idea, we will stop it from  happening. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Do you think high-income earners pay too much tax in Australia?    

 SHORTEN: Well, my priority in taxation is to make sure that people who go to  work have enough incentive to keep working harder and they have the option of  saving. I'm mainly concerned I have to say, about the burden of taxation on lower  and middle income earners. In my experience, the top one per cent in  Australian society are generally capable of looking after themselves, I wish them  well. But as a person interested in the future of this country, I'm interested in how  the people who earn $30,000 and $40,000 are getting on, I'm interested in  how the people who are earning $100,000, $150,000 are getting on. I want to  make sure that the system's fair for ordinary Australians so that they can get their  foot on having a house deposit, they can pay their fees for their kids, be it health  care costs or school fees. I'm concerned that people in their 50s and 60s have  enough money to retire upon. Australia's living in a unique time - we're the first  generation of Australians, the first time in Australia's history, where we'll have two  generations of retirees alive at the same time, so I'm interested in how we help  the vast bulk of the Australian people get to a level of comfort as opposed to  worrying about how much money multimillionaires have in their superannuation  accounts.   

  JOURNALIST: Do you support the establishment of the Government's Border  Force?    

 SHORTEN: In terms of the Border Force, we are committed to seeing that we  have strong borders. Not every issue in Australian politics needs to be Labor on  one side of the fence and Liberal on the other side of the fence, but again our  policy is that we want to have strong borders but we also want to make sure that  we are the compassionate nation that Australians expect us to be in terms of  genuine refugees overseas.    

 JOURNALIST: Is it propaganda?    

 SHORTEN: Is what propaganda?    

 JOURNALIST: The Border Force [inaudible].   

 SHORTEN: I have to say when it comes to some of these matters, what I try and  do is look for the best in what's happening and not always try and see the worst  in what's happening. But what I know Australians want, is they want a consistent  approach in terms of our national security and our border security. They want a  constructive job from the Opposition and that's the leadership we're giving. We  will be constructive on the merit of ideas, we will be less worried about who says  them.    

 JOURNALIST: Are you surprised that Fairfax has partially lost its battle against  Joe Hockey over defamation charges?   

 SHORTEN: That's an issue for Mr Hockey and whatever Fairfax chose to write  about him, I don't comment about those personal matters. But what I should  comment about is that overnight, we've heard that an Indonesian Air Force plane  has crashed into an urban area in Sumatra and there's been significant loss of  life. This is a disaster. I place on record my condolences to the Indonesian  people and of course the Indonesian Government. This is terrible news. Any  other questions?    

 JOURNALIST: Do you believe that Customs and Immigration should be  merged?     

 SHORTEN: We haven't seen the propositions around that, I'll wait to see details  before I start commenting. And again just before I finish, I just want to reiterate to  Australians, that today, unfortunately they've woken up, the Government's  implementing a four-year freeze on increasing the payments that the government  makes to doctors and GPs. Our GPs are the hard-working front line of our  medical response in Australia. They are being asked to pass on effectively a GP  Tax by stealth. Shame on the Government for this new GP Tax by stealth, they  haven't got the courage to put these measures up to an election. Australians  were lied to before the last election by Mr Abbott saying there'd be no changes to  health. Today, July 1, 2015, Australians are now facing a back-door GP Tax from  the Abbott Government and Labor will oppose this.  Thanks, everyone, lovely to see you today.   

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053   

