---
title: "Statement on Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan and Operations in the Middle East"
date: "2015-09-16"
creators:
  - "Andrews, Kevin"
source: "MINISTER FOR DEFENCE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/215998114
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4080301%22
---

  Australian Government 

  Statement by the Minister for Defence, the Hon Kevin Andrews MP 

  Statement on Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan and Operations in the Middle East 

  16 September 2015 

  I speak today to update the Parliament and the Australian people about Australia's Defence  operations in Iraq, Syria, Afghanistan, the broader Middle East region and our maritime approaches. 

  IRAQ & SYRIA- OVERVIEW 

  Since my last Defence Force operations update to the Parliament, we've seen further atrocities and  terrorist attacks either conducted, or inspired by, the terrorist movement known as Daesh. 

  Beyond Iraq and Syria, Australia's thoughts and condolences are with the people of France, Kuwait,  Tunisia, Turkey and, most recently, Saudi Arabia whose countries have suffered at the hands of  Daesh terrorists. 

  These attacks reaffirm that Daesh is a threat not only to the Middle East, but to all countries,  including Australia. 

  It is for this reason that the Australian Government remains committed to the international effort to  disrupt, degrade and ultimately defeat Daesh. 

  This commitment is underscored by the Government's decision to extend Australian Defence Force  air strikes against Daesh into eastern Syria. This is a logical extension of our existing commitment  in the Middle East. 

  As the Government announced last week, this marks the next phase of Australia's contribution to  our important campaign against Daesh. 

  Daesh does not respect borders and threatens the security of Iraq and the international community  from its safe havens and command centres in Syria. 

  It controls a large amount of territory in eastern Syria that serves as a source of recruitment and oil  revenues. From Syria, Daesh has been able to operate its training bases, conduct planning and  preparation for attacks, and move fighters and equipment into, and out of, Iraq. 

  Royal Australian Air Force efforts in eastern Syria will are being directed solely at Daesh- we will  not be engaging in the broader conflict in Syria. 

  The legal basis for Australia's air operations in Syria remains the collective self-defence oflraq.  We strongly believe Iraq should not be left to face this horrendous threat alone. 

  This is why Australia is continuing its Advise and Assist and Building Partner Capacity missions to  develop the capacity of the Iraqi Security Forces, and continues to contribute an Air Task Group, at  the request of, and to support, the Iraqi Government. 

  IRAQ- ADF OPERATIONS UPDATE 

  Australia welcomed the commencement in July oflraqi Security Forces operations to retake the city  of Ramadi from Daesh. 

  The mission is being led by the Iraqis and is being supported by the US-led international coalition,  which includes Australia. 

  There have been some positive signs in this vital mission. 

  However, the Iraqi Security Forces require ongoing support to reclaim and hold their territory, so  they can assume responsibility for Iraq's security. 

  BUILDING PARTNER CAPACITY MISSION 

  Now into its fifth month, our combined Building Partner Capacity mission with New Zealand is  steadily making progress. 

  At the end of June, around 700 personnel from the Iraqi Army's 76th Brigade graduated from its  training provided by Task Group Taji, representing the first tranche of regular Iraqi Army soldiers  trained under the Building Partner Capacity mission. 

  To date, Task Group Taji has provided training to more than 1600 Iraqi Army personnel and it  continues to receive further Iraqi Army units for instruction. 

  Task Group Taji is currently training the next tranche of around 700 soldiers from a number of Iraqi  units. 

  The Task Group has been training both officers and soldiers in skills including weapon handling,  building clearances and obstacle breaching techniques, as well as training in the tactics, techniques  and procedures for various operations. The Building Partner Capacity mission includes mentoring  and training in professional military conduct, including the Law of Armed Conflict. 

  SPECIAL OPERATIONS TASK GROUP 

  Our Special Operations Task Group continues to advise and assist the Iraqi Counter-Terrorism  Service, in areas such as advanced combat tactics, K-9 training, combat casualty care and  explosives identification and neutralisation. 

  As the Government indicated in April, the composition of Australia's Advise and Assist mission  will change in the third quarter of this year. 

  The Government has decided to re-shape the scope of the Advise and Assist mission, from around  200 ADF Special Forces personnel to around 80. 

  This re-shaping allows Australia to balance its contribution between specialist advice and support to  the Iraqi Counter-Terrorism Service provided by the Special Operations Task Group, and the  training provided to the regular Iraqi Army through the Building Partner Capacity mission. 

  AIR TASK GROUP 

  Australia's Air Task Group remains a leading contributor of platforms, support personnel and  missions flown in the coalition air campaign against Daesh. 

  As at 13 September, the Air Task Group had completed a total of 408 ADF airstrike missions over  Iraq. 

  Specifically, 

  • Our F/A-18 Super Hornet aircraft have completed 209 missions, releasing 278 weapons;  • The F/A-18 Hornet aircraft have completed 199 missions, releasing 237 weapons;  • The KC-30A air-to-air refuelling aircraft has conducted 394 missions, offloading nearly 32  million pounds of fuel to Australian and coalition aircraft; and 

  • The E-7 A Wedgetail airborne early warning and control aircraft has conducted 135  command and control missions. 

  As has been reported, the Air Task Group has completed its first strike against a Daesh target in  eastern Syria, destroying an Armoured Personnel Carrier. 

  Two of our F I A-18 Hornets identified the Personnel Carrier, hidden in a Daesh compound. 

  The information was reported back to the Combined Air Operations Centre via the RAAF E-7 A  Wedgetail. 

  Upon receiving authorisation to proceed, one of the Hornets employed a precision guided weapon  to destroy the target. 

  EMBEDDED ADF PERSONNEL 

  Australian Defence Force personnel are also embedded within United States headquarters in the US  and across the Middle East Region, including in Iraq and other coalition partner countries, to  provide command and control functions, and to maintain Australian awareness of regional  developments. 

  Five Royal Australian Air Force personnel attached to the United States Air Force perform  operational duties with their US parent unit as MQ-9 Unmanned Aircraft System pilots and sensor  operators. 

  They operate as part of a US unit, but they do so in a manner consistent with Australia's  obligations under international law. 

  These activities in the fight against Daesh- the Building Partner Capacity, Advise and Assist and  air operations- reflect the Australian Government's steadfast commitment to keeping Australians  safe from terrorism and preventing the spread of violent extremism to our shores. 

  AFGHANISTAN 

  In June this year I attended the NATO Defence Minister's Meeting in Brussels to discuss the future  of Afghanistan. 

  Australia remains committed to the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission which is focused on  training, advising and assisting the Afghan Security Institutions and Afghan National Defense and  Security Forces. 

  As I advised the Parliament earlier this year, our commitment to Afghanistan has become the  longest combat, and now mentoring military commitment, in Australian history, involving over  33,000 deployed ADF personnel since 2001. 

  It has involved significant sacrifice and commitment, including the lives of 41 ADF personnel who  have died in Afghanistan. They have made the ultimate sacrifice, and we continue to mourn with  and recognise the sorrow faced by their families and friends. 

  A further 261 Australian Defence Force personnel have been wounded, and many more affected in  other ways by their involvement in Australia's mission to bring a more peaceful future to this war  tom country. 

  Over the last decade and a half, our purpose in Afghanistan has not changed. 

  Our continuing efforts to build Afghan capacity and institutions aim to ensure that Afghanistan will  never again become a safe haven for al Qaeda and other international extremist groups. 

  CURRENT COMMITMENTS 

  Around 400 Australian Defence Force personnel are currently deployed in Afghanistan under  Operation HIGHROAD as trainers, mentors, embedded personnel in headquarters and in critical  force protection, medical and intelligence roles. 

  Our commitment at the Afghan National Army Officer Training Academy supports the mentoring  of Afghan Officer Cadets outside Kabul. 

  A class of 283 officer cadets graduated on 16 June, including the first female cadet  platoon. This was the first commissioning of female officers to have completed their training at the  academy. The Duntroon Sword for best overall cadet was won by a female officer cadet and was  presented to her by the Australian Ambassador to Afghanistan. 

  Australia is also supporting Afghan security sector sustainment through an annual commitment of  US$1 00 million. One important project funded by this commitment is the provision of Australian  designed and manufactured counter improvised explosive device equipment. The equipment  provides the Afghan Security Forces with a life saving capability, tangibly increasing their 

  confidence and capacity to conduct independent operations. 

  AFGHAN PROGRESS 

  At the beginning of2015, the Afghan National Defense and Security Forces assumed full  responsibility for the security of the Afghan people. 

  It was always acknowledged that their first fighting season in full security lead would be a  challenge for Afghan forces. 

  While there have been tactical setbacks, overall the Afghan National Defense and Security Force is  providing security for the Afghan people, fighting its own battles, and holding population centres. 

  The Afghan security forces continue to demonstrate their increasing ability to plan and conduct  independent operations. 

  We urge all key stakeholders to continue their support for reconciliation. This is because,  notwithstanding security gains, the path to lasting peace will be through an Afghan-led and Afghan  owned reconciliation process. 

  FUTURE COMMITMENT TO AFGHANISTAN 

  Decisions about the ADF commitment in 2016 are yet to be made, but we will continue to take  account of Afghan progress, as well as NATO and United States' plans as these develop. 

  Beyond 2016, Australia will remain a constructive and committed partner to our Afghan friends. 

  MARITIME AND PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS 

  In addition to our commitment in Afghanistan and Iraq, the ADF continues to support vital work in  maritime security and peacekeeping operations in the wider Middle East and around the world. 

  Since 1991 Australia has conducted near continuous maritime security operations in the Middle  East Region in support of international efforts to promote maritime security and stability. 

  Australia's current commitment comprises a Royal Australian Navy Major Fleet Unit and personnel  to support the US-led Combined Maritime Forces (CMF) to defeat terrorism, prevent piracy,  encourage regional cooperation, and promote a safe maritime environment. 

  HMAS Melbourne relieved HMAS Newcastle earlier this month on the 6th of September. HMAS  Newcastle successfully seized over 1.3 tonnes ofheroin during her four and a half month  deployment, valued at over $1 billion, helping make this maritime force one ofthe world's most  effective current heroin interdiction forces. 

  Piracy off the Hom of Africa remains at record lows with no successful attacks since 2013, largely  due to the ongoing international operations in the region, in which Australia's plays a critical role. 

  Australia also continues to be committed to peacekeeping in the Middle East. ADF personnel have  participated in Operation PALADIN since 1956, representing our longest commitment to a  peacekeeping mission, with 12 ADF personnel currently deployed in the Golan Heights and  southern Lebanon. 

  Nearby in the Sinai, Australia was an original participant in the Multinational Force and Observers  mission under Operation MAZURKA in 1982, and continues to participate today with a contingent  of25 ADF personnel. 

  I also acknowledge the efforts of around 400 ADF members on Operation ACCORDION, who  are supporting Australian operations, including providing logistics and sustainment support and  enabling contingency planning across the Middle East Region. 

  We have a further 21 ADF personnel deployed to the UN Mission in South Sudan, under Operation  ASLAN. Our commitment to this mission is helping the UN to protect the people of the Republic of  South Sudan through the monitoring of human rights and the delivery of humanitarian aid. 

  These important commitments to stability and security in the Middle East Region, Afghanistan and  South Sudan highlight Australia's ongoing commitment to a rules-based global order, which  supports Australia's security and prosperity. 

  Our thoughts are with the men and women of the ADF who are undertaking these important  missions, and with their families. 

  OPERATION SOVEREIGN BORDERS 

  Finally, in our own region, the Australian Defence Force continues to support Operation Sovereign  Borders. Currently around 500 ADF personnel are at sea, in the air and on land working to protect  Australia's borders and offshore maritime interests. 

  These ADF personnel have performed an essential role in supporting the Government's efforts to  successfully disrupt and halt the people smuggling trade that cost over 1 ,200 lives at sea in recent  years. 

  CONCLUSION 

  The ongoing professionalism of our Defence Force and the readiness of our ADF personnel to  defend Australia's interests around the world at short notice is truly extraordinary. 

  On behalf of the Government, and indeed this Parliament, I would like to extend my sincere  gratitude to these men and women, as well as their families, for all they do to ensure the safety and  security of Australia and its interests. 

  (ENDS) 

  1\ustralian Go\'ernment 

  Statement by the Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, 

  the Hon Peter Dutton, MP 

  Australia's response to the Syrian humanitarian crisis 

  16 September 2015 

  I take this opportunity to update the House on Australia's response to the escalating humanitarian crisis in  the Middle East, in particular, Syria. 

  The images have been confronting for all of us. The crisis is becoming increasingly desperate as countries  in the region struggle to cope with the enormity of the situation and the growing numbers of people  displaced by the conflicts. 

  It is estimated that to date, more than 4 million Syrians have fled their country. It is estimated more than  another 7 million are displaced internally. 

  Australia has already provided support and is moving quickly to do more. 

  More than 3,300 visas have been granted in our offshore programme to Syrian refugees in recent years. 

  In 2012-13 there were 98 Syrians accepted as part of our offshore refugee and humanitarian programme  which has grown to 2,232 in the most recent financial year. This was part of over 4,500 humanitarian visa  grants to Syrians and Iraqis last year. 

  Last week, I met with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr Antonio Guterres, officials  from the UNHCR and officials from the International Organisation for Migration in Europe to inform  Australia's response to this situation. 

  Accordingly, the Government has announced a generous package of assistance beyond our existing  humanitarian programme intake. This includes:  • 12,000 visas for those who face significant persecution as a result of the conflicts in Syria and  Iraq; and 

  • an increase in funding of $44 million for humanitarian aid in Syria and Iraq. 

  The Government will continue to work closely with the UNHCR, the International Organisation for  Migration and other partners in the region to deliver the increase in humanitarian places. 

  The Department of Immigration and Border Protection and partner agencies are working quickly to  implement arrangements to manage the increase. 

  The Department is deploying additional staff to the region and will use a combination of short and long term  deployments in decision making roles in Lebanon, Jordan, and Turkey, where the bulk of people displaced  by the conflict are located. 

  Multi-disciplinary teams, including security, identity and biometrics specialists will be deployed as needed. 

  Priority will be given to women, children and families from persecuted minorities and who are assessed as  being most vulnerable. 

  All applicants will be required to meet the criteria for a humanitarian visa, including health, character and  security assessments which will be conducted before individuals are able to enter Australia. We need to  respond to those who are most vulnerable, but we also need to ensure we are doing so with Australia's  national interest in mind. 

  As with other humanitarian entrants, visa recipients will be eligible for social security benefits, Medicare,  English language assistance, torture and trauma services and settlement services. 

  The Department of Social Services, responsible for settlement arrangements, will take into account a range  of factors including family links, available services such as health and accommodation, in planning for these  arrivals. The Government is advised that settlement organisations are currently well placed to provide for  this increased intake. The Refugee Resettlement Advisory Council has been tasked with providing advice to 

  Government on the expansion of services, on matters of harnessing community support, settlement location,  social cohesion and the importance of education and employment. 

  Our latest contribution of humanitarian aid will deliver food, water, healthcare, education, emergency  supplies and protection, including support for women and girls and will assist 240,000 displaced people  affected by the conflict in Syria and Iraq. 

  This will bring Australia's contribution to address the humanitarian crisis in Syria and Iraq to about  $230 million_since 2011. 

  I know Members' offices and Government agencies have had countless offers of generous support from  members of the Australian public in responding to this situation. The Government will work with State and  Territory Governments, community leaders, peak organisations and settlement providers to try to harness  this support in a practical way. 

  Since the end of World War II, more than 825,000 refugees and others in humanitarian need have been  resettled in Australia. 

  Once again, Australia has responded generously to those most in need, caught overseas in conflicts far from  our shores. 

