---
title: "Retirement of Anna Burke MP"
date: "2015-12-16"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/221719425
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4262568%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 

 RETIREMENT OF ANNA BURKE MP 

 

 Today, I pay tribute to Anna Burke MP for her remarkable service to the Labor Party  and the people of Australia following her decision to retire from politics at the next  election.    

 In 1998, Anna wrested the seat of Chisholm from the Liberals and has served the  people of her electorate with passion and purpose for 17 years and a further five  victories.     

 Anna has represented her community and the cause of progress with energy and  integrity, particularly as an advocate for taking real action on climate change and the  humane treatment of refugees.    

 Fittingly, Anna's electorate was named for Caroline Chisholm, ‘The Immigrants' Friend',  for her work with new immigrants to New South Wales in the 19th century.  Chisholm  argued for jobs, accommodation and proper support for migrants who were often  treated as second class citizens.    

 As the Member for Chisholm, Anna upheld this tradition as a fearless and tireless  advocate for the rights of asylum seekers. Her unflinching dedication has earned her  deep respect both inside and outside our party.    

 In an often fractious and contested Parliament, Anna was a skilful, impartial and patient  Speaker, becoming only the second woman to hold the position in the history of  federation.    

 Anna has served the people of Chisholm, our party and Australia with absolute  distinction.    

 She leaves with our heartfelt thanks and deep gratitude.    

 We wish Anna, her husband Stephen and children Maddie and John the very best for  the future.   

 WEDNESDAY, 16 DECEMBER 2015   

 MEDIA CONTACT:  LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053   

