---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Brisbane: 23 October 2015: PNG resettlement; medical treatment for refugee on Nauru"
date: "2015-10-23"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "PNG resettlement"
  - "medical treatment for refugee on Nauru"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/217899709
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4157450%22
---

 1 

 

 

 The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection   

 TRANSCRIPT   

 Doorstop     

 23 October 2015 

 

 

 Subject: PNG resettlement, medical treatment for refugee on Nauru   

 E & EO Transcript   

 PETER DUTTON: Firstly I want to say thank you very much to Luke Howarth for  being here with me here today.    

 The Moreton Bay University will be an incredible project and it will help young kids  within our region that otherwise wouldn't have had the opportunity to go to university  or wouldn't have been able to travel each day in and out to QUT or UQ or to Griffith.    

 It's a big hole in our local community here and I think the Council has done a great  job in securing the site and I hope that the Federal and State Governments can  provide financial support over a period of time and that commercial partners come on  board as well to make this a reality for our region.   

 I want to just make a couple of comments if I can in relation to the announcement by  Minister Pato in Papua New Guinea.    

 The Government obviously has a very strong working relationship with the PNG  Government in relation to the operation of Manus Island. The Regional Processing  Centres at Manus and at Nauru are an important part, along of course with turn-backs where it's safe to do so, in our success in stopping the boats and making sure  that they don't restart.    

 I welcome the advice from the PNG Government that they're going to now resettle  some of those people on Manus into PNG on a permanent basis.     

 I'm meeting with Minister Pato over the next few days and I'll have a look at the  concrete detail that's been proposed by Minister Pato, but we do welcome the advice  from Papua New Guinea.    

 This will now be a reality and complies with the agreement that Australia and Papua  New Guinea entered into.    

 2 

 

 Obviously the Government's message remains very clear, that is that we are not  going to settle people who seek to come to our country by boat.    

 If they're in Regional Processing Centres on Nauru or Manus they will not settle in  Australia and that’s why this deal is important, this announcement is important, that  the people who are at East Lorengau now or who are being assessed within the  Manus Island Regional Processing Centre will be on a pathway to permanent  settlement in Papua New Guinea.    

 So we welcome that advice and I look forward to our discussions with the Papua  New Guinea Government.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister when did Minister Pato make that announcement?    

 PETER DUTTON: The PNG Government released that advice and obviously I've got  and my Department has meetings with Minister Pato early next week, but the PNG  Government is honouring the commitment that they've entered into under the  Regional Resettlement Arrangement and we welcome that advice.   

 JOURNALIST: Minister when I spoke to the PM’s office and other offices in PNG  this morning they said there hadn’t been a statement released.    

 PETER DUTTON: I just ask you to have a look at the information that's been  released and obviously we welcome that.    

 We're very keen to continue working with an important partner in PNG because our  message remains very clear and that is that we are not going to allow people  smugglers to restart their business, we are not going to allow these deaths at sea  and people who are on Manus or Nauru will not settle permanently in Australia.    

 The fact that PNG is honouring the commitment within the RRA is very welcome and  I look forward to our discussion next week.    

 JOURNALIST: What impact can you see this development out of PNG having?    

 PETER DUTTON: I think the development here is that it sends a very clear message  to people smugglers and that is that the Government's resolve is as strong as it's  ever been.    

 We are not going to resile from the fact that we have a tough policy when it comes to  Operation Sovereign Borders, but the dividend is that we can bring people in in  record numbers through the Refugee and Humanitarian Programme and we  demonstrated that in particular with the announcement about the 12,000 Syrians.    

 But we are not going to allow the people smugglers to get back into business  because 1200 people lost their lives at sea.    

 And this demonstrates that people who are on Manus have the potential if they're  found to be owed protection to be settled in Papua New Guinea, but they will not be  settling in Australia.  

 3 

 

 We're able to provide others with assistance to return to their country of origin if  they're found not to be owed protection and that's a very important step.    

 JOURNALIST: Is this a pre-emptive move from the PNG Government to head off the  constitutional challenge to the legality of the Manus centre?    

 PETER DUTTON: Any questions for the Papua New Guinea Government you  should put to them.    

 I'll take one at a time.     

 JOURNALIST: Is there more work to be done in regard to the process if they are to  be resettled in PNG? Does the Government’s responsibility in that point and go to  the PNG Government?   

 PETER DUTTON: The Papua New Guinea Government obviously has responsibility  for the management of the Regional Processing Centre on PNG as the Nauruan  Government does for the RPC on Nauru.    

 Our determination is to provide support because regional processing is an important  part of our how we’ve been able to stop the boats and we'll continue to work with our  partners.   

 But people obviously have the ability to now move into PNG society as the  agreement originally provided for and I think that's important.    

 JOURNALIST: Does the Australian Government provide any assistance to PNG to  facilitate that resettlement?    

 PETER DUTTON: We do. The Australian taxpayer provides considerable assistance  in terms of the way in which the Regional Processing Centre is run, in terms of the  contracts and the other services which are provided there that are funded by  Australia.    

 Part of the difficulty of course was that when Labor had 50,000 people arriving on  824 boats, they had an $11 billion blow-out in relation to border protection policy.    

 Now we've been able to resurrect the security and the sanctity of our borders, we’ve  been able to save money, we’ve been able stop deaths at sea and we’ve been able  to welcome people in record numbers through the Humanitarian Program.    

 That's the way in which an orderly migration program should operate and we're not  going to make any decision that would sacrifice that outcome.   

 JOURNALIST: So Minister are you denying that the Australian Government has  announced this, or your Department or you, have announced this before the Papua  New Guinea Government announced this?    

 PETER DUTTON: I would refer you back to my previous answer to your question. I  don't have any anything to add further.  

 4 

 

 

 JOURNALIST: Okay, and how much is it costing per refugee per year to resettle  them in Papa New Guinea?    

 PETER DUTTON: Well the point is that Labor left us with an enormous legacy, it's a  point well made.    

 There are 50,000 people who came by boat. There are 30,000 plus within the legacy  case load including those on Manus and Nauru, but living in the Australian society or  within detention otherwise and there is a big cost with that.     

 The cost will not reduce until two things happen. One is that you stop the boats,  which is what the Government has been able to achieve. Secondly to work through  those people who have arrived by boat to allow for them to be processed, to  determine whether they're owed protection.    

 In any case, those people on Nauru and Manus will not be settling in Australia.  We’ve been very clear about that and we'll provide support, settlement packages for  people to return and that does come at a significant cost, there’s no question about  that.    

 But the alternative is an $11 billion blowout which is what Labor presided over. We're  not going to return to those days.     

 JOURNALIST: In Estimates this week it was figures that were given came to  $28,000 per refugee per month of the round 48 to 50 that have been released in  Manus.    

 Is that right? So it’s costing $28,000 a month per person that’s being resettled?    

 PETER DUTTON: So the benefit of having Manus and Nauru in addition to turning  back boats where it's safe to do so is that we stop new arrivals.    

 So the point is that by having the Regional Processing Centre arrangements which in  part were negotiated by Labor, dismantled originally by Labor - and bearing in mind  that when Mr Rudd came into Government in 2007 there were four people in  detention in total including no children. Under Labor we had 2,000 children in  detention. The number today on the mainland is down to about 97 and I intend to get  that number closer to zero.    

 So the cost of new arrivals if we didn't have regional processing and we didn't have  turn-backs where they have safe to do so would be an enormous burden for the  Australian taxpayer.    

 So that's a context in which you're looking at the costs around the management of  this policy.    

 But if people, including those on the left within the media and elsewhere, want to us  return to the devastation of 1200 people drowning at sea and the way in which Labor 

 5 

 

 lost control of our borders then they should be clear about that, but that is not this  Government's policy.    

 JOURNALIST: So can you confirm it costs about $300,000 plus a year to resettle  each refugee?   

 PETER DUTTON: I just refer you back to the previous comment I made.    

 That's a context in which you should consider these figures and I think that's the fair  analysis of it as I provided to you a moment ago.    

 JOURNALIST: Minister, apologies if it’s been raised already, but with regards to this  Somalian refugee who claims she was raped on Nauru will she be given the  opportunity to come back to Australia to consider a termination again?   

 PETER DUTTON: I made clear the other day that the Government had provided a  significant amount of support to this lady who is in a very difficult circumstance.    

 She alleges that there was a sexual assault on Nauru and we've provided support  both on Nauru, but in Australia as well.    

 The lady was able to see a number of doctors and nurses including mental health  nurses and also with the assistance of an interpreter here in Australia.    

 She decided that she didn't want the termination and was returned to Nauru.    

 I said at the time that I thought it was very regrettable that the personal details were  being played out in public. Now others made the decision to release those details,  some of those details were factually incorrect and I don't think it served the interests  of the lady involved at all.    

 I sought to correct the record in terms of what the Government had provided by way  of support particularly through the medical services, but I don't think it's helpful for to  us continue to talk about what is a very private matter - a matter of grave personal  importance, a decision that should be made and a discussion that should be had  between a patient and a doctor.    

 I don't have anything further to say as I've said during press conference in Canberra  earlier in the week.   

 In relation to any of these matters, doctors will discuss issues with patients and what  that is in the best interests of that patient is what will be acted upon. Okay.     

 JOURNALIST: Does the government have any concerns for any gay asylum  seekers resettling on PNG?   

 PETER DUTTON: We have obviously a policy that operates not just in relation to  new arrivals, but people within the legacy case load now who might be in same-sex  relationships for example.  

 6 

 

 We're sensitive to situations particularly where there may be discrimination against  individuals and we're able to provide support to people in that circumstance.    

 But in relation to Manus I'm not sure of the particular circumstances that you're  referring to.    

 The management of the Manus Regional Processing Centre is an issue for the PNG  Government, but in terms of support that we provide here, we look at each individual  case and we provide assistance based on its merit.    

 JOURNALIST: Peter so there’s no mention of the resettlement process in the  Memorandum of Understanding signed between Australia and Papa New Guinea in  August 2013.    

 How much input has the Australian Government had into this PNG resettlement  policy and when are we going to see it?    

 PETER DUTTON: Well I think the point that I'd make is that the Government's been  very clear and that is that we're not going to allow people who have sought to come  to our country by boat who are on Manus or Nauru to settle permanently in Australia.    

 There has been an agreement entered into originally by the Rudd Government in the  case of Manus for people to settle in PNG and those people will not get a permanent  migration outcome in Australia.    

 That's the way in which we've approached our discussions with PNG and I note that  my opposite number Mr Marles today welcomed this development.    

 We'll continue to work constructively with the PNG partners as we will with other  bilateral partners because we're not going to allow the people smugglers to get back  into business…   

 JOURNALIST: …so have you seen this resettlement policy?    

 PETER DUTTON: …that's the clear policy of the Government. We're not going to  allow these people to get back into business.    

 Thank you very much.   

 [ENDS]   

 

 

 

 

 

