---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Launceston: 16 November 2015: education; Paris attacks; refugees; vocational education and training; marriage equality; China Eastern announcement; Tasmanian tourism"
date: "2015-11-16"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "education"
  - "Paris attacks"
  - "refugees"
  - "vocational education and training"
  - "marriage equality"
  - "China Eastern announcement"
  - "Tasmanian tourism"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/219488241
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4198990%22
---

    

 E&OE T DOORS LAUNC MONDA   

 SUBJEC training   

 TANYA  be here  staff and are parti most im that Bill  technolo skilled jo the budg announc helping  because bound to every Au school th high qua that kids basic lan who are think tha

 DE

 SHAD AN

 TRANSCRI STOP INTE ESTON   AY, 16 NOV

 CTS: Educ g; marriage

 PLIBERSE at Queech d students.  icipating in 

 portantly le Shorten ha ogy, engine obs that Au

 get reply sp cements ab students w e we know t

 o be an ent ustralian yo hrough high ality teachin s learn this 

 nguage tha  happy to p at programs

 THE HO EPUTY L DOW MI ND INTE

 M

 PT   RVIEW  

 VEMBER 20

 cation; Pari e equality; 

 EK, DEPUT y High Sch We’ve see national co earning the 

 as been so  eering and m stralians w peech earlie

 bout investi ho have stu that if scien thusiastic a oung person

 h school an ng resource language o at all of thes

 play on the  s like this th

 ON TAN LEADER NISTER ERNATIO

 EMBER

 015 

 ris attacks; China Eas

 TY LEADER ool and I’m n a fantast ompetitions

 skills that t determined maths skills ant to do in er this year

 ng in stude udied STEM nce, engine nd talented

 n to have th nd we want  es so that o of the 21st c se innovatio

 iPad but no hat have yo

 YA PLIB R OF TH R FOR FO ONAL D R FOR SY

 ; refugees; stern anno

 R OF THE  m delighted  ic range of  , designing

 hey need fo d to invest i s is because n the future 

 , Bill Shorte ents who stu M subjects  eering, math

 d teacher. A he opportun to invest in our teachers

 century.  Wi ons will dep ot design th oung people

 BERSEK E OPPO OREIGN EVELOP YDNEY

 ; vocationa uncement;

 OPPOSITI to be welco projects fo g cars, desig

 or the jobs  n coding in e we know  depend on en made a 

 udy STEM  at universit hs, are you And we’ve a

 nity of learn n making su s can teach ithout unde pend on in t

 he apps tha e cooperatin

 K MP  OSITION N AFFAIR PMENT 

 al educatio t; ,Tasmani

 ON: Well it omed here  r a number gning subm

 of the futur n schools an that the hig n these bas

 number of  subjects at ty become t r first love t also said th ning coding

 ure that we h coding in  erstanding c the future -

 at the iPads ng together

  

 RS 

 on and  ian tourism

 t’s wonderfu by principa r of teams t marines, but

 re. The reas nd science, gh-wage, h sic skills. Du

 t university, teachers  then you’re  at we want

  from prima ’ve got very schools, so coding - the - we’ll have

 s run off. So r, investing 

 

 m  

 ul to  als,  that  t 

 son  , 

 igh-uring 

 

 

 t 

 ary  y 

 o 

 e 

  kids  o we 

 their time and energy in understanding aerodynamics, hydrodynamics, engineering,  maths, computer-assisted design, 3D printing, but also marketing and promotion for  their own projects really does help open their eyes to the type of high-skilled, high-wage 

 jobs that they might be interested in pursuing in the future. Now of course, none of this  investment in coding in schools, or STEM can happen without substantial investment in  our school system. And we know that the fact that the Federal Government has decided 

 not to go ahead with years 5 and 6 of the Gonski school education funding means more  than $150 million dollars over the next 10 years -  that this area - the federal electorate  of Bass - will miss out on. When you look around you, you see the cost of providing  some of this modern equipment that the students are using. You see the cost of  students participating in competitions that take them interstate and hopefully even  overseas and you think how tough it is to do that on the strained resources that our  public schools in particular are facing. We know that Tasmania in particular will be very 

 badly affected by the $30 billion dollars of cuts to school education funding, we know  that schools in low SES areas and schools that are remote or regional would have  benefited massively from the Gonski funding formula. And the fact that schools will miss 

 out really does - despite the wonderful work of the students and staff here, despite the  commitment of individual school leaders - makes it much harder if you actually see  funding cuts from the Federal Government. I’m sure that Ross and Michelle will want to 

 make some comments as well about the State Government’s well, you know in the first  withdrawal of funding and cuts to teacher numbers that we’ve seen here. So that’s it on  STEM. Do people have any questions on this issue in particular? No? Any other Federal  issues?     JOURNALIST: How do you respond to France’s airstrikes in Syria this morning?    

 PLIBERSEK: Well I think it’s very important to understand that the people of France  and the Government of France have experienced a calculated attack on their own soil.  France was already heavily involved in fighting Daesh in Iraq and in Syria. This is a  terrorist organisation that has set out to hit the people of Paris, the people of France and  I think the whole global community, to strike terror in the heart of people all over the  world. I think it is important to have a strong military response to Daesh, but it’s also  important that the work going on now between Foreign Ministers and other Defence  officials meeting recently in Vienna, for example, to find a political solution over coming  months and years is equally important. Until we have a unified international objective to  defeat Daesh, it is - it's hard to see where the solution to this driver of terrorism  internationally will come from. So it's important, of course, to have a military solution that  fights Daesh. It’s important to have work on a political transition, and of course, it is the  responsibility of nations like Australia to assist the 11 million or so displaced people and  refugees from Syria to make it through the northern hemisphere winter. We know that  there is a massive humanitarian need here. The first victims of Daesh are the people of  Syria and northern Iraq, and we need to continue to offer assistance to them also.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you agree with calls that Australia's borders should be closed to stop  terrorists entering Australia posing as refugees?    

 PLIBERSEK: Well, I think the situation of Australia is quite a different situation to what  we've seen in Europe. We have a very careful process of checking refugees and asylum  seekers before they come to Australia. We have to remember that the 3 million people  at least who have fled Syria itself, the 7 million or so that are internally displaced, the  300,000 or so that have lost their lives in Syria, they are the first victims of Daesh. And  also, the victims of the Assad regime which has been so brutally repressive of its own  people. Of course, we have to be careful. Of course we have to be careful when people  come to Australia to check their backgrounds, their identities, their security status, but  we also have to remember that the first victims of Daesh are the people that we are  setting out to help.     JOURNALIST: Do you think Australia should expand its air strikes in Iraq and Syria to  combat IS or put boots on the ground? 

    PLIBERSEK: I think it’s important to acknowledge that Australia is already one of the  most significant contributors to the mission in northern Iraq and over the border into  Syria. We were very early to get involved. We are, aside from the United States,  probably the second largest contributor per capita, in fact, you could say even the  largest contributor. So we are doing a very important job in fighting a terrorist  organisation that is completely brutal in its zealotry, attacking communities on religious  and ethnic grounds across northern Iraq and in Syria, causing mayhem and destruction  wherever they go. But Australia has stood up very strongly as part of the international  coalition to do that.     JOURNALIST: Australia will take an extra 12,000 refugees from Syria and Iraq. Do you  think that's enough?     PLIBERSEK: Well, I think it's important that the Federal Government has said that we  will take an extra 12,000 people. And I'm pleased to see that a number of State  Governments have been very strong in saying that they will welcome those refugees  and assist with resettlement, but there is an area where Australia should be doing more.  Acknowledging that there are 11 million displaced people and refugees driven from their  homes by this brutal conflict, acknowledging that we're going into the northern winter,  where many of these people fear starvation or freezing to death. We need to provide  greater humanitarian assistance to countries of first asylum. Many millions of people are  now - who've fled Syria are now living in Lebanon, in Jordan, in Turkey. Countries that  themselves are not wealthy countries. If we can assist those refugees to stay in  Lebanon, Syria and Jordan, to be confident that they will have food and shelter in the  coming winter, they can do what they desperately want to do, which is return to Syria as  soon as it's safe.     JOURNALIST: The Federal Government has proposed a takeover of vocational  education and training from the States, including Tasmania. What's Labor's position on  this?    

 PLIBERSEK: Well, I think it's important that we have a system of running vocational  education and training that is fit for purpose. I think our TAFEs do a fantastic job. We've  seen some reports recently of unscrupulous private sector providers and we need to  have a system that both supports investment in TAFE and Labor has a TAFE funding  guarantee, but also ensures that private vocational education providers are providing  the high quality that we expect in vocational education. I think it's a little bit rich for the  Federal Government to be talking about improvements to the system when we've seen  cuts to support for vocational education in particular in the area of apprenticeships.  We've seen billions of dollars removed from vocational education and apprenticeships,  and Tasmania in particular really feels that; it's a State that has relatively high levels of  youth unemployment, particularly in some parts of the country. So having a strong  apprenticeship and trainee system is a great benefit for young Tasmanians and young  Tasmanians and their parents really should be saying to the Federal Government: give  us a system that's fit for purpose, ensure that there's investment in TAFE and make are  sure, where private colleges are receiving government funding, that they're providing a  decent quality of education.     

 JOURNALIST: Some private training organisations here in Tasmania are concerned  about the proposal and they want to maintain their relationship with the State  Government, not the Federal Government. Do you think it's fair that Tasmanian  organisations, I guess change their systems because of problems with training in other  states?    

 PLIBERSEK: Look, I think frankly we need a lot more detail from the Federal  Government about exactly what they're proposing. Talk about changing who’s  responsible, State or Federal, in a system like this kind of misses the point, when the  Federal Government is taking billions of dollars out of apprenticeships and traineeships.  Perhaps they should resource the system properly, have legislation that’s fit for purpose  and then we can have a more sensible conversation about how to have a high-quality  apprenticeship and traineeship system that meets everybody's needs. Ok, I might hand  over.     

 ROSS HART, ALP FEDERAL CANDIDATE FOR BASS: I think the challenge for Bass  is the fact that we need to focus on jobs, education and health and central to that is the  question of education. We’ve already heard from Tanya with respect to the issue of  years 5 and 6 of the Gonski reforms. We’re seeing a reduction in funding over the  length of that, the 6 year commitment that Labor made to Gonski in Bass alone. It’s  central to the future of the people we’ve seen today that their education gives them the  skills of the future, access to the high paid jobs of the future. Tremendously inspiring  today to see students putting into practice some of what they’ve learned, particularly in  the area of STEM, particularly inspiring for me because my observation of Tanya was  that if I’d been exposed to this sort of thing during my schooling, I might have ended up  with a different career, so a really wonderful opportunity to see the investment in  education in practice.     

 MICHELLE O'BYRNE, TASMANIAN DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION:  Fantastic to be here in one of Tasmania’s great public schools, we’re very proud of the  standard of education that’s provided in all of our public schools. What’s been very  disappointing has been the cuts to education, the removal of at least 2 teachers from  each of our primary and high schools and 4 teachers from each of our colleges. We’ve  seen these kind of cuts at a time when the Government claims to be investing in  education and heralded - although sneakily on a Saturday when there were no schools  to prove them wrong - announced that they’ll be increasing the number of teachers in  schools to around 105. 105 addition teachers out of Gonski money, which goes  nowhere near to replace the teachers that they heartlessly ripped out of schools and the  support staff that they ripped out of schools. And importantly for these students, the  pathway plan is - people whose job it was to guide them through their transition from  their 4 years of high school into college, further education or training. If the Government  is absolutely serious about investing in these young people and their great talents then  reinstating pathway planners would go a long way. What we do know with their college  rollout, their year 11 and 12 rollout, is one of the options they’ve put on the table is in  fact about putting pathway planning programs back in schools. I think this Government  just needs to stop being political, sit down, have a look at what their schools need and  invest appropriately in staffing.     

 JOURNALIST: So what’s your position on the proposed changes to private vocational  training in Tasmania?    

 O'BYRNE: Well Tasmanian Labor firmly believes that the primary provider of training  should be our TAFE system - our excellent TAFE system - despite the attacks that it’s  been under in recent years. What we do know is that there are private providers who  behaved inappropriately in the market. And I understand the Federal Government had  an opportunity only last week in Parliament to move to a system that provided a fit-for-purpose regulation and chose not to. And so once again what we see is once again a  one-lineer, “oh that’s ok, we’ll take it over.” We’ve see this sort of thing from the Federal  Government before; one-liners that they initiate, they don’t have any detail, they don’t  have any scope and they certainly haven’t consulted with the states about it.     

 JOURNALIST: COAG will meet on Friday, what do you think the State Government  should be doing to lobby the Minister of Vocational Education and Skills, Luke  Hartsuyker?    

 O'BYRNE: Well what we’d like to see is a reinvestment into support provided to  apprentices. As many people know, in Tasmania the apprenticeship pathway - and  we’ve spoken to some young people today for whom that’s their pathway - is what gets  them into stable and secure employment into their future. And the fact that apprentices  are getting so much less support makes it so much harder for them and harder for  employers to take that risk to invest in training. If we don’t have investment in training  opportunities, then the young people that we’ve been talking to today are seriously  disadvantaged. So what we’d like to see from the Federal Minister is an engagement in 

 supporting our traineeships, supporting our apprentices more broadly and not just  having one-liners.     

 JOURNALIST: In light of the terror attacks, the Premier today has said they won’t be  halting the refugee intake that they’re promised earlier this year. Are you in support of  this?     

 O'BYRNE: We absolutely recognise that those people to whom Tasmania is generously  offering a safe haven are fleeing the exact attacks that we’ve seen in recent days in  Paris. But we’ve also seen in recent times in Beirut, in Turkey and certainly in Syria. We  know that we have an obligation, a humanitarian obligation to support those people.  Tasmania has historically done that very well and we still stand ready across all political  parties to make sure that we can play our part in providing a safe place for those people  who are fleeing the sort of terror that we got a little glimpse of in Paris over the last few  days.     

 JOURNALIST: The Greens will bring for a conscience debate on a motion giving in  principal support for marriage equality. They’ve negotiated extra time for the debate on  Wednesday. What would your view be on putting this forward?     

 O'BYRNE: Well, this is not the first time the Tasmanian Parliament has debated  marriage equality and I once again go from a point for not very long we were the most  draconian of states in terms of our support and engagement of same-sex, people of  same-sex relationships. To have gone from that position to the Parliament very nearly  approving our own stand-alone legislation in late 2013 I think is incredible maturing of  Tasmania.  My personal view has always been for marriage equality and if this in any  way provides a message of support to those members of Australian Parliament who  need to hear that voice, then I think it’s an appropriate place to do so.     

 JOURNALIST: Will it be a conscience vote for Labor?    

 O'BYRNE: Marriage Equality has traditionally been a conscience vote for Labor.  Matters generally of life or death, but for some reason also marriage equality.     

 JOURNALIST: And who do you think in the Party might not support it?    

 O'BYRNE: Well that would be a matter for individuals to go through but I think a quick  look at the previous voting patterns, I think this is the third time that we would have  debated marriage equality in the Tasmanian Parliament should give most people an  understanding of where people might line up on this vote. Remembering that this  particular motion is calling on the Federal Government to take action which of course is  a different circumstance from the legislation that we put forward which would have  allowed stand-alone legislation in Tasmania. The Howard Government made a decision  to define marriage during its term of Parliament as being between a man and a woman.  By doing that we believe that the, that that actually allows under the way that the 

 constitution works for the state to legislate in an area that is not covered by the  Australian Government, that being same-sex marriages.     

 JOURNALIST: Michelle, it’s been announced that China Eastern airlines are offering  passengers a chance to book flights directly to Hobart. What’s your reaction to that and  does this mean the Government’s trade missions are working?    

 O'BYRNE: Well we’ve been engaging with China for many years around the way that  we can open up, particularly for tourism engagement - there is a growing middle class  in China and we’re seeing tourism numbers in Tasmania grow substantially. What we  also know is that airlines that have to, for which you have to pay a second flight upon  arrival in a country to get to another destination can always be an issue that precludes  people from coming to regional areas such as Tasmania, they work better for Sydney  and Melbourne, so we’re pleased to see that sort of investment. And it’s an investment  that Labor in Government worked on substantially for many years.     

 JOURNALIST: And what would be your focus in Parliament this week?     

 O'BYRNE: Well this is the last sitting week of Parliament. We’re expecting to fight a  vigorous fight to save our online access centres for the Minister capitulated online  access centres and has given them a one year stay of execution. We were going to fight  very strongly for the Big Picture School we’ve been campaigning for strongly but the  Minister capitulated and has decided to keep the Big Picture School. From an education  perspective, I’m hoping he now steps up and gives us the trifecta and delivers the  continuing assistance of the East school to support those students who are  marginalised or for whom traditional education models don’t work. So that will be my  focus this week.     

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT:  DAN DORAN 0427 464 350 (PLIBERSEK)   

  

