---
title: "Statement from Anna Burke [Retirement from Parliament]"
date: "2015-12-16"
creators:
  - "Burke, Anna"
source: "Office of BURKE, ANNA, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/221653609
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4261149%22
---

 

 ANNA BURKE  MEMBER FOR CHISHOLM   

 

 STATEMENT FROM ANNA BURKE 

 

 I am making this announcement with mixed emotions, but the time has come and I have  decided to call it quits at the next election.    

 It has been a complete joy and honour to have served as the Member for Chisholm over  the last 17 years and I could not have achieved it without the dedication, drive and  support of the ALP membership in Chisholm, my family and friends and, of course, the  wonderful people of the community I have been fortunate to represent.   

 The seat of Chisholm is not mine, it is not the property of any party, it belongs to the  people who call the suburbs of Chisholm home and they have been very gracious to  elect me six times to represent them in Parliament.    

 I have had a great time being their local member - indeed, for me, working in the seat  visiting schools, nursing homes, disability services, ethnic groups, the universities,  doorknocking, and generally engaging with my community is what I have thrived on.    

 I am not running away from the prospect of facing a Malcolm Turnbull-led coalition. I  know what will soon be apparent to all - Malcolm is sound and fury, full of nothing. He is  Abbott in a better suit and with a better turn of phrase, but he is doing nothing and he is  letting the country down by not abandoning the policies of the Abbott era.    

 Mr Turnbull has done nothing to improve the lives of asylum seekers, nothing to  improve Australia’s response on climate change, nothing to improve our economy or job  prospects, nothing to improve education or health - just to name a few areas of  inaction. Indeed, Malcolm continues to preside over the reversal of much of the  progress Labor had made while in government.   

 I am not leaving because I want to look after my young family; Maddie and John are no  longer young, and I hope I have not sacrificed my family for my job.    

 I said I would go when I was no longer able to give the job 100% and I just can’t  guarantee it anymore. I’m leaving because you have to go sometime and I want to go  before I resent doing a job I love and no longer cherish every moment in my electorate.    

 I would like to thank everybody who has helped make my past 17 years in Parliament  possible. This is just the beginning of goodbye, as I will be around until the next  election, supporting the Chisholm Labor Candidate and working to help not only win the  seat of Chisholm, but to see a Shorten Labor Government elected.   

 WEDNESDAY, 16 DECEMBER 2015  

 MEDIA CONTACT: ALASTAIR GOWING 0425 767 918    

 

