---
title: "Australia welcomes Nauru open centre"
date: "2015-10-05"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/216671991
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4117450%22
---

 

  5 October 2015 

  The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

  MEOlA STATEMENT 

  AUSTRALIA WELCOMES NAURU OPEN CENTRE 

  The Australian Government welcomes the Government of Nauru's announcement that  Nauru Regional Processing Centre (RPC) is now an 'open centre' an the time. 

  Open centre arrangements have been in place at the RPC since February 2015 and  have allowed transferees greater access to the community. The arrangements allowed  eligible tr&nsferees to leave the centre through a designated exit point, une.$00rted.  during agreed hours on certain days. 

  We have supported the Government ol Nauru in making the open centre arrangements  possible by funding senrice providers and sharing Australian expertise with Nauruan law  enforcement agencies. 

  Australian Federal Police (AFP) officers have been helping the Nauru Police Force  (NPF) build their capability and capacity to manage the growing population. 

  The AFP maintains two Police Advisors to the NPF on Nauru and has provided other  specialist advisors when required. Four AFP officers were deployed for six weeks in  May 2015. Another AFP officer was deployed in late June 2015 for twelve monlhs, to  continue workplace mentoring and capability development support to the NPF in the  area of sexual assault and child abuse investigations. 

  We also welcome the news that the Nauruan Government has undertaken to finalise the  remaining refugee claims that have been under consideration for some time. 

  The Australian Government is committed to the Regional Processing Arrangements. 

  We will continue to support the Government of Nauru, through funding of contracted  service provider, to deliver settlement services to refugees in Nauru. 

