---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 13 August 2015: Syria; marriage equality"
date: "2015-08-13"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Syria"
  - "marriage equality"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214413238
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4010003%22
---

  

 THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 

 MEMBER FOR SYDNEY 

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE  THURSDAY, 13 AUGUST 2015    

 SUBJECT: Syria; Marriage equality.      TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: I just wanted to say a  few words about Dan Tehan’s comments on Syria. We woke up this morning to see a  Liberal backbencher calling for Australia to be involved in bombing IS targets in Syria. I  think it’s very important to understand the background of this situation. Labor has been  very supportive of the Government in a bipartisan fashion, taking humanitarian action in  Iraq. We’ve been invited by the Iraqi government to assist it to train its own troops to  protect its own people. There is a very clear legal basis for Australian involvement in  Iraq. As the Prime Minister himself has said, there is no clear legal basis for Australian  involvement in Syria. There is certainly a humanitarian disaster in Syria. Syria is country  with about the same population as Australia and with about 11.5 million people who are  displaced from their homes, either within Syria or neighbouring countries. There are  millions of people who are refugees in countries such as Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey and  so on. So there is undoubtedly a humanitarian disaster in Syria and it is undoubted that  Daesh is a force that should be defeated. But we go back to the problem that the Prime  Minister himself first identified, there is no clear international basis for Australia’s  involvement in Syria and there’s no clarity about the outcome that Australia would be  fighting for. On the one hand we’ve got IS, on the other hand we’ve got the Assad  regime. We’ve got hundreds of groups proliferating in Syria; Jabhat al-Nusra, a variety  of groups that are also attacking civilians, that are murderous, that are besieging cities,  that are using the worst tactics possible. If the Prime Minister believes that Australia  should be involved in Syria, he should come into the Parliament, he should explain the  basis on which he has changed his mind, and he should make a case to the Australian 

 people through the Australian Parliament. It is extraordinary to be sending a  backbencher out to run up the flagpole, a decision as serious as this - that we’d send  Australian armed personnel into harm’s way in one of the most dangerous places on  earth.   

 JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]   

 PLIBERSEK: Well, our role should indeed include an increased humanitarian  assistance to Syria. When Labor was in government, we gave $100 million to  humanitarian assistance. Since the Liberals have been in government, they’ve given  $35 million, as the situation has become much, much worse. They’ve made  commitments to increasing the humanitarian intake from the region- we’ve seen little  movement in that area. So primarily, our assistance should be humanitarian. We are, in  Iraq, one of- in fact, the most significant country providing assistance on a per capita  basis besides the United States. We have certainly committed some of our finest  personnel and some significant equipment to the fight in Iraq. And if the Government  wants to make a case that there should be a change, that everything they’ve said in the  past about there being no legal basis for Australian intervention and no clear ally on the  ground in Syria, if they want to make a case that that’s changed, they should certainly  offer a briefing to the Opposition. But more importantly, they should explain to the  Australian people through the Parliament why they’ve changed their view.    

 JOURNALIST: If the case is made, then would you consider supporting Australia  joining the US air strikes in Syria if requested to by the US?   

 PLIBERSEK: Well, it’s not a matter of being requested to by the United States. It’s a  matter of the Australian government determining that this is in line with international law  and making clear: what is the strategic objective here? Who is it we are fighting beside?  What is the government that they would expect to see if IS were defeated? None of  those questions have been answered and it is important for the Government to answer  these serious questions.    

 Can I also just, before I have to go upstairs, say a few words about the marriage  equality debate. Overnight, we’ve heard the Government again in chaos. We’ve heard  some government ministers saying there should be a plebiscite, some saying there  should be a referendum. This is an expensive and unnecessary delaying tactic for  something we know the Australian public want. It’s estimated that this will cost $120  million. Is this really how we want to spend $120 million of taxpayers’ money when we  have so many important issues before us? Countries like us around the world have  made this decision. In Australia,  the decision is properly a decision for the Parliament.  The High Court has already made that ruling. Anne Twomey, an eminent constitutional  lawyer, has also said that this is a matter for the Parliament to decide, not for a  referendum. We know that the people who are pushing for a referendum in the Liberal  Party are the opponents of marriage equality and they’re doing it because they want to  delay and hopefully prevent, from their point of view, marriage equality ever becoming a 

 reality. If there is a change of government, there will be legislation for marriage equality  within the first 100 days. Thanks.    

 ENDS    MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350   

