---
title: "New appointment to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal"
date: "2015-03-13"
creators:
  - "Brandis, George"
source: "ATTORNEY-GENERAL"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211425008
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3717556%22
---

 

 

 

 SENATOR THE HON GEORGE BRANDIS QC  ATTORNEY-GENERAL  MINISTER FOR THE ARTS   

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 NEW APPOINTMENT TO THE ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS TRIBUNAL 

 Today I announce the appointment of Ms Sian Leathem as the Registrar of the Administrative  Appeals Tribunal (AAT). 

 Ms Leathem takes up her position at a significant moment in its history. In May 2014, the  Abbott Government announced its intention to reform Australia’s external merits review  system.  

 From 1 July 2015, the AAT, Migration Review Tribunal and Refugee Review Tribunal, and  Social Security Appeals Tribunal will amalgamate, thereby removing unnecessary layers of  bureaucracy and delivering an improved and simplified merits review system for all  Australians. 

 Ms Leathem has over ten years’ experience in tribunal management at both state and federal  level.  She has unique experience in leading the project team responsible for merging twenty-two existing tribunals into the New South Wales Civil and Administrative Tribunal (NCAT)  and performing the role of Principal Registrar of that amalgamated tribunal.  

 Prior to her role at NCAT, Ms Leathem was the Registrar of the Workers Compensation  Commission of NSW for five years. She also has relevant experience of the Commonwealth  administrative review system and governance, finance, staffing and administrative  arrangements, gained in her role as Assistant Registrar of the AAT over three years.  

 Ms Leathem also has a wealth of legal policy experience that she gained with the Office of  the Legal Service Commissioner in NSW, where she served in several different roles  including Acting Assistant Commissioner and Acting Deputy Commissioner.  

 In 2002 and 2014, Ms Leathem was awarded the Excellence in Government Legal Service  Award by the Law Society of New South Wales.  She was also awarded the Young Public  Sector Leader Award by the Institute of Public Administration Australia in 2011. 

 I congratulate Ms Leathem on her appointment, which commences on 7 April 2015 for a  period of five years. 

 I also thank Mr Phillip Kellow for his strong leadership of the AAT as Registrar over the past  five years. 

 12 March 2015 

   Contact: T: +61 2 6277 7300 E: agmedia@ag.gov.au 

