---
title: "Helping the region to address irregular migration"
date: "2015-05-29"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211857741
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3860051%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon Julie Bishop MP 

 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION 

 The Hon Peter Dutton MP   29 May 2015 

 

 HELPING THE REGION TO ADDRESS IRREGULAR MIGRATION   

 The Australian Government welcomes Thailand’s initiative in hosting the Special  Meeting on Irregular Migration in the Indian Ocean in Bangkok today.    

 The meeting has been called to highlight the importance of a regional response to  tackle this issue. Addressing the root causes of people smuggling is critical to finding  an effective regional solution.   

 Australia is a major donor to Burma and Bangladesh, supporting economic  development that will reduce the motivation for people to risk their lives at sea.    

 Today we announce an additional $5 million in humanitarian assistance to Burma’s  Rakhine State and the Cox’s Bazar region of Bangladesh building on the $6 million for  humanitarian assistance to Burma announced last week.   

 It brings Australia’s total humanitarian assistance to Burma to over $20 million since  2012.   

 Australia remains committed to playing our part to address this regional challenge and  has provided over $170 million since 2000 through the International Organization for  Migration for victims of people smuggling in Indonesia.    

 Australia is one of the top three resettlement countries in the world, accepting large  numbers of refugees referred by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees  from our region.    

 With partner countries Australia is working to strengthen criminal justice systems to  counter human trafficking through the $50 million Australia-Asia Program to Combat  Trafficking in Persons.    

 As Co-Chair of the Bali Process with Indonesia, Australia is also supporting  improvements to law enforcement, legal capacity, border integrity and information  campaigns across the region to tackle people smuggling.   

 Foreign Minister’s Office: Rachel Obradovic 0478 488 874   Minister for Immigration and Border Protection: John Wiseman 0417 498 570    

