---
title: "Dutton's growing list of debacles"
date: "2015-08-30"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/215307011
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4046906%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO 

 

 DUTTON’S GROWING LIST OF DEBACLES    

 Almost 12 months after former Immigration Minister Scott Morrison clinked champagne  glasses in Cambodia to toast a $40 million refugee resettlement deal with the country,  the Government has serious questions to answer following reports the deal appears to  have collapsed according to Cambodian officials.    

 Shadow Minister for Immigration Richard Marles said the Government’s so-called deal  with Cambodia was a quick fix deal done on the run.    

 Labor has always been critical of this deal. Before it was signed we had to rely on the  Cambodian Government for updates on its progress, then we had the distasteful image  of Scott Morrison sipping champagne in Phnom Penh while refusing to answer  questions during a five minute ceremony to ratify the plan.    

 Only four refugees ever opted to relocate from Nauru to Cambodia as part of the deal  despite the Abbott Government putting up $40 million for the deal.    

 Now less than a year since it was announced, the arrangement appears to be in  question with Cambodia’s Interior Ministry spokesperson Khieu Sophiak telling The  Cambodia Daily newspaper: “We don’t have any plans to import more refugees from  Nauru to Cambodia. I think the less we receive the better.”    

 Again, the Australian people are forced to rely on the government of another country to  find out exactly what is going on with its policies.    

 Peter Dutton is lurching from debacle to disaster, and the Australian people would be  right to be fast losing confidence in his capacity to properly do his job.    

 The collapse of this deal will no doubt be met by silence from Mr Dutton who has  refused to front the media in the last 48 hours following the botched Australian Border  Force operation that left his newly minted agency the subject of widespread ridicule.    

 SUNDAY, 30 AUGUST 2015    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563   

