---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne: 24 July 2015: Tony Abbott's plan to increase the GST to 15 per cent; trade; asylum seekers"
date: "2015-07-24"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "Tony Abbott's plan to increase the GST to 15 per cent"
  - "trade"
  - "asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/213583320
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3970897%22
---

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON 

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  MELBOURNE - AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY NATIONAL CONFERENCE  FRIDAY, 24 JULY 2015    

 SUBJECT/S: Tony Abbott’s plan to increase the GST to 15 per cent; trade;  asylum seekers    

 CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Well thanks everybody for coming. I’ll  just make a few brief remarks before taking a few questions. Obviously it’s a  busy morning and I’ve got another meeting to get to so I won’t be here detaining  you for too long but I’ll take some questions after some remarks.    

 Firstly, just on yesterday, the Prime Minister opening the door to an increase in  the GST. The Prime Minister promised on multiple occasions before the election,  no increase in the GST, never will a Tony Abbott Liberal Government increase  the GST. Not in the first term, not ever. That was his firm commitment to the  Australian people. Yesterday he said he preferred an increase in the GST to  other tax rise. He seems to not be aware that an increase in the GST is a  massive tax increase. And the claim from the Premiers yesterday and from  Premier Baird in particular was not tax reform, not a GST increase replacing  other taxes, but just a tax increase pure and simple to go to the States. Tony  Abbott yesterday indicated he was open to that idea. That he preferred that idea  to other ideas. Just goes to show, when Tony Abbott says he wants to deliver  lower, fairer, simpler taxes, all he really wants to do is exactly the opposite -  higher and more unfair taxes. The Labor Party's position is clear and consistent,  and will remain so.    

 Now obviously here at the Labor conference, an important day today, opening  the Labor conference. Bill Shorten will address the conference this morning. I'm  sure Bill's speech will be an opportunity for him to outline an alternative vision for  the nation. A nation which embraces the opportunities of innovation, of new jobs, 

 jobs of the future. A nation which embraces the opportunity of the rise of Asia in  our region, economically. A nation which embraces the opportunity for a modern,  fair and smart economy. A nation which embraces the opportunity to strike out for  a more egalitarian fairer nation, to give women a fair go in our economy, to give  Australia's first peoples, our indigenous peoples, Australia's Aboriginal and  Torres Strait Islanders, at last, equal place in our society.    

 That's the sort of vision that Bill Shorten has for Australia, the sort of vision the  Labor Party has for Australia, and the sort of vision a Labor administration, a  Shorten Labor Government will administer and today Bill will outline that. Now of  course, there will be plenty of good, strong and robust debates over the course of  the next three days and that's as is right with a party which has an opportunity to  debate the future. For good people, of good faith, to put their views. At the end of  the day this is an opportunity for Bill Shorten, for the Labor team, to outline an  alternative vision for the country and that's exactly what we'll be doing. Happy to  take a few it questions.    

 JOURNALIST: What does it say about your vision for an open Australia that we  have a rally today against a free trade agreement?    

 BOWEN: Well on free trade, let's say firstly that Labor of course supports free  trade and Labor supports agreements which are good quality free trade  agreements. We have delivered them in office and we’ve supported them from  Opposition. Now, what this Government has done is conflate a free trade  agreement, an important free trade agreement with our largest trading partner,  with very concerning changes to immigration and to labour laws and to temporary  migration, which we will continue to examine and which we will continue to  express our views about. And of course, there will be a trade debate and I think  that debate obviously will be an opportunity for Penny Wong in particular, as our  trades spokesperson, to outline Labor's approach. Labor's approach, which is  embracing of trade, but also wants to see a proper protections and standards in  place for what are very important skilled migration laws.    

 JOURNALIST: Can you amend it or will you oppose it in Parliament?    

 BOWEN: Well Penny Wong of course will be providing further commentary on  this. But what we'll be doing is obviously outlining - as we have done in the past  with free trade agreements, as was with the US Free Trade Agreement, you  might recall Chris outlining particular concerns and then outlining a way forward,  but obviously Labor does support free-er trade because it provides jobs  opportunities for Australian jobs to grow, and be created, with growing export  markets in manufacturing services and agriculture. But where we do have  concerns we make no apologies for expressing those concerns and for pursuing  those policies in the Parliament and outside the Parliament.    

 JOURNALIST: Members of Labor's left say they feel ambushed by Bill Shorten's  declaration this week that a future Labor Government should support boat turn  backs. They say that it’s a fight you didn’t need to have here. Is this  miscalculation on Bill Shorten's part?    

 BOWEN: I think Bill Shorten has shown considerable leadership in dealing with  this very difficult issue. What Bill has done, openly and transparently, is indicate  what the approach he'll be taking at this conference is in advance to the  conference. I think if he'd left it to the conference floor people could accuse him  of not being open and honest in advance of the conference and he might be  accused of the opposite of what people are saying. Instead he's laid out from the  beginning what his approach is and I think when he outlines the full gamut of his  approach to immigration over the course of this conference, there will be plenty  for people to focus on, in terms of positive impacts, but of course the Labor Party  believes in policies which are fair, which give more people the chance of  resettlement in Australia in a safe and orderly and fair fashion. And yes, that  means difficult decisions and yes there will be views expressed on the floor of the  conference. But I fully support the efforts that Bill has taken and I would say  they'll be supported on the floor of the conference. He's shown the leadership  necessary to deal with this difficult issue.    

 JOURNALIST: Did you know this was coming before the Leader announced it on  7:30 the other night?    

 BOWEN: The Leader consulted appropriately with senior colleagues, yes.    

 JOURNALIST: So you knew it was coming?    

 BOWEN: The Leader consulted appropriately with me and other senior  colleagues, yes.    

 JOURNALIST: Was it ticked off by Shadow Cabinet?    

 BOWEN: I don't talk about Shadow Cabinet but the appropriate and normal  processes were in place, yes.    

 JOURNALIST: Anthony Albanese says he didn't know that it was coming.    

 BOWEN: I don't think that's an accurate reflection of Anthony’s comments, with  respect.    

 JOURNALIST: Did you know the announcement would be made this week  though before the conference - was that discussed?    

 BOWEN: What was discussed in Shadow Cabinet and what Bill consulted with  other leadership colleagues about is all very interesting. The appropriate thing is 

 that Bill consulted appropriately with senior colleagues, the Shadow Cabinet was  consulted on the policy announcements and initiatives and obviously there will  always be people who say this could have been done or that could have been  done, what Bill's done is deal with a very difficult issue up front, forthright and  appropriately, tough issue, and he's laid out that he will not put a situation to be  continuing where Labor can't have the policy options available to it necessary to  save lives and ensure a fairer, more orderly and safer refugee system.

 JOURNALIST: If someone moves an amendment to explicitly ban boat turn  backs you expect the member to be voted down at this conference?

 BOWEN: Look, Bill's outlined the position, I'll certainly be supporting that position  and I expect that to be the case.

 JOURNALIST: Do you expect the leader to win on the floor? 

 BOWEN: I expect the conference to recognise the strength of Bill’s arguments,  yes.

 JOURNALIST: (inaudible) if an amendment that seeks to block his turn back  position is put forward, even if it's carried by your side of the argument, only  narrowly?

 BOWEN: Look, you know, the floor of the conference there will be robust  debates and there will be votes. At the end of the day, I expect Bill's position to  be supported on the floor of the conference because it's the right position. I’ve  got time for one more question before I’ve got to go to another meeting.

 JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen you'll be meeting with some business observers over  the conference, what's your message to the business community from this  conference?

 BOWEN: My message to the business community is the Labor Government will  deliver good policy, there will be consultation with the business community and  with the broader community, we'll deliver policy certainty. The business  community, frankly, and we and myself as Shadow Treasurer and the shadow  economic team have had good and open dialogue. There is great discussions  between us on a very ongoing basis. That will continue in office. Labor believes  in jobs and economic growth, working with business to deliver jobs and economic  growth, that's what we will deliver, that's what I would deliver as Treasurer, that’s  what Bill would deliver as Prime Minister.

 Thanks guys, have a great conference.

 ENDS 

 MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879 

