---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Senate doors, Canberra: 17 August 2015: Parliament House cleaners; opinion polls; treatment of asylum seekers; marriage equality"
date: "2015-08-17"
creators:
  - "Cameron, Doug"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES"
subjects:
  - "Parliament House cleaners"
  - "opinion polls"
  - "treatment of asylum seekers"
  - "marriage equality"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/214649914
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4018588%22
---

 

 SENATOR THE HON DOUG CAMERON  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES  SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES    

 

 E&EO TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  SENATE DOORS, CANBERRA  MONDAY, 17 AUGUST 2015    

 SUBJECT/S: Parliament house cleaners; Opinion polls; Treatment of  asylum seekers; Marriage equality.    

 SENATOR DOUG CAMERON, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN  SERVICES: A bit chilly this morning, but can I just indicate that the position that  the Parliamentary House cleaners find themselves in is absolutely outrageous.  This is a government who I hear talking about their plans, but their plans seem to  be to cut the wages and conditions of some of the poorest paid workers in this  country and we all know that if they could get away with it they would adopt the  Productivity Commission recommendation to cut penalty rates for millions of low  paid workers in this country.    

 This is a government who’s only plan is to avoid taking any action against the big  tax avoiders and hammer the lowest paid workers in this country by terrible  industrial laws.    

 Journalist: Do you think the MP’s will survive a week of grotty bathrooms?    

 CAMERON: I am sure MP’s will survive a week of grotty bathrooms and  hopefully they have got enough sanitary sense to deal with it. But the bottom line  is that these are poorly paid workers being absolutely hammered by this  government. This is Eric Abetz, this is the WorkChoice warrior in full flight, taking  pay and conditions off some of the lowest paid workers in this country.    

 JOURNALIST: You [inaudible] the opinion polls today showing that the  government potentially faces a 36 seat wipe out - what’s your reaction to that  [inaudible] 

 

 CAMERON: Well obviously it reflects what the Australian public think of this  rotten government. They understand that this government is not looking after  their interests, they are economically incompetent, they have lied to the  Australian public from day one in government, the public are onto this mob. They  don’t trust the Coalition and they are paying a price for the disunity, for the lies  and the lack of trust they have engendered in the Australian public.    

 That first Budget said all about this Coalition Government. Leave the rich alone,  leave the well-off alone and come after the lowest paid workers and the poorest  people on welfare in this country. So yes they are paying a price and I think they  will pay that price right up to the next election. The country has had enough of  the disunity, the chaos, the rabble that this Government is.    

 JOURNALIST: There is a Wilson security guard who works on Nauru who claims  that asylum seekers were being subjected to water boarding and other forms of  torture. What is your reaction to that - is it appropriate?    

 CAMERON: Well it’s certainly not appropriate; I’d be appalled if there is any truth  to that. You know the secrecy that the Abbott Government surrounds the  detention centres with is unacceptable. There has to be more openness in how  these facilities operate. People have to be treated with humanity and that’s my  position and my position has been that all along.    

 JOURNALIST: Bill Shorten is still not in a fantastic position in the polls, 49 per  cent of people disapprove of his performance, do you think he’s doing a good  enough job to prosecute the case for Labor?    

 CAMERON: Well any opposition leader that leaves the Coalition floundering in  the polls is doing a good job.   Bill Shorten has been under personal attack by the  Coalition, he answered hundreds of questions at the Royal Commission and that  Royal Commission is now seen to be what it is - an absolute political set up  against the Coalition’s political opponents. So Bill Shorten is doing a good job.  He’s got my full support, the full support of the party and we want to continue  going on developing the policies that create jobs in this country ,that look after  those that can’t look after themselves and be a decent government - not the  rabble that this Coalition is.    

 JOURNALIST: Would you like to see a debate on same sex marriage on the  floor of the House in this sitting?    

 CAMERON: Well of course - I’d like to see more than a debate, I would like to  see all Australians treated equally and when you have got the extremists in the  Coalition in charge of the Coalition party room this is what you get. You get this  chaos. You get this nonsense about going to a referendum when you don’t need  a referendum. Anyone who is arguing for a referendum on this issue is basically 

 trying to mislead the Australian public and that misleading is about ensuring that  there is never equality for all Australians. So people like Morrison who are  running around arguing for a referendum are just deceiving the Australian  public.           

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: PHIL MORGANS 0419 421 826   

