---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Dickson, Canberra: 3 June 2015: STEM; jobs for the future; Liberal leaks and cabinet division; Royal Commission; Government splits on superannuation; immigration; Government voting against their own budget measures; $100,000 degrees"
date: "2015-06-03"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "STEM"
  - "jobs for the future"
  - "Liberal leaks and cabinet division"
  - "Royal Commission"
  - "Government splits on superannuation"
  - "immigration"
  - "Government voting against their own budget measures"
  - "$100,000 degrees"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211872525
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3872147%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG    

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  DICKSON  WEDNESDAY, 3 JUNE 2015    

 SUBJECT/S: STEM; Jobs for the future; Liberal leaks and cabinet division;  Royal Commission; Government splits on superannuation; Immigration;  Government voting against their own budget measures; $100,000 degrees    

 ANDREW LEIGH, MEMBER FOR FRASER: Thanks to everyone for being here  and welcome to the great electorate of Fraser to Dickson College which is a  school with an innovative program to encourage students to put their coding skills  to work. I’d like to thank Kerry and Mark and Tom for their hospitality in having us  here and their willingness to show us what coding skills can do to help create the  jobs of the future. It is truly inspiring to see what some of these students are  doing, putting in place skills that some Australian students wouldn’t be learning  until university. Let me now hand over to Labor leader Bill Shorten.      

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks very much Andrew.  It’s great to be here at this remarkable college. Australians perhaps  underestimate how clever and how hard working our young people are. I’ve just  met a dozen of the smartest secondary school students I think we could  meet anywhere and they're all studying science and engineering, technology  and mathematics. What these young people are doing is setting Australia up for  the future, it's all about the jobs of the future.    

 Labor has proposed that we need to have a plan for the jobs of the future, a lot of  parents wonder where will the jobs be for their kids. In the future we will need  more skilled jobs and less unskilled work. That's why Labor wants to see  primary school students, every child and every primary school have a chance to  learn to code. It’s computational thinking, it’s learning the language of computers  and then what we've also said is that for this bright generation of future engineers 

 and scientists and teachers, we want 100,000 of these young people over the  next five years to be able, if they complete their degrees, not to have to pay  HECS. But we've also made it clear that it's not just a matter of training our  young people. It’s not just a matter of encouraging more to do science and  technology at university, we want to see our teachers rewarded to upskill so that  they have the skills to teach our kids and so that the kids can fall in love with the  passions of the future through their studies and their motivated teachers. We also  want to make sure that a lot of the science and engineering grads actually  are encouraged to do teaching so they can again teach the future generation of  our young people.     

 But along with all of these very important plans, these sensible plans, supported  by our business community and our science community and our  education community, we also believe it's important we support start-up  business, that's why we have a smart innovation fund worth half a billion dollars  to make sure that we put the money behind the early start-ups and we work with  venture capitalists and fund managers so that we've got an economic pipeline of  investment to back up the workforce of the future and indeed that is why we have  supported parts of the Government's Budget to do with small business.    

 We've made it clear from Budget night to my individual and direct conversations  with the Prime Minister, to my Budget Reply speech and every day in the last 22,  23 days since the Budget that Labor will support the Government's proposals  on small business. We are not the negative Opposition that Tony Abbott was. We  are made from different stuff. Where there's a good idea, Liberal or Labor, we'll  get behind it to help small business and to help jobs. For me it's all about jobs.  So you can imagine my surprise today when I proposed that we bring on  the legislation, bring on the Budget to help small business, let's get it through the  House of Representatives and the Senate in the fortnight. Now Tony Abbott  challenged us to do it after scaring people that we weren't, even though he  knows that Labor's always supported these small business measures in fact  we supported them in Government when he didn't. But today we put our money  where our mouth was, nearly every Labor MP there to vote for the small  business package.    

 What on earth is the Government thinking when they voted today against  fast tracking their own measures to help small business? It was one of the silliest  acts of political stupidity the Abbott Government's done.    

 We know they are districted by the division in their own ranks. We’ve seen Julie  Bishop run out to say she wasn't the original leaker of this terrible national  security leak, now we've got Malcolm Turnbull trying to move the spotlight off  him. There are a couple of facts when it comes to division in this Government.  One, someone leaked what happened in Cabinet to do with national security. No  one's denying that the discussions that we’re reported didn't take place.    

 So now we're in the zone where we've got Ministers lying about lying. They're  all issuing their denials. But the problem for Tony Abbott is every one of his  Cabinet Minister said it wasn't them, then who did leak the national security  discussions? You know, the Government treat Australians as mugs.    

 It would appear today in light of their crazy vote against fast tracking their  own small business measures, the only thing that unites the Abbott Government  is voting against their own Budget measures being fast tracked.    

 Happy to take questions.    

 JOURNALIST: Speaking of divisions, just how damaging is the now very  public split between the former Labor Prime Ministers being dredged up all over  again and will this cost you the next election?    

 SHORTEN: Ursula, when you say these matters are being dredged up again  you’re right on the money. This is history, it is not a secret that there was disunity  in the Rudd Labor Government and the Gillard Labor Government, that’s not a  secret, it’s old news to be fair. I mean the Rudd and Gillard Labor Governments  did accomplish some really good things, things which will stand the test of time.  The handling of the Global Financial Crisis where Australia fared better  than most other first world countries, the apology to the Stolen Generations,  greater funding for education so we get these kids getting the best chance in life  and the National Disability Insurance Scheme, just to name  some accomplishments.    

 But there's no denying that mistakes were made and one of the greatest  mistakes was disunity in the Government. When a Government can't govern itself  how can it govern the nation? But as your question conceded, that is in the past.  I think I have been very fortunate to have quite a marvellous run of unity within  the Labor Party and I think what's interesting about the discussion of Labor's  history is this is Liberals’ present. They are divided. You've got Andrew Robb  saying different things to other Ministers about whether or not they'll deregulate  wages and conditions in the aviation industry. You’ve got different Ministers  wanting different strategies when it comes to the handling of national security.    

 I mean today, the only thing which unites the Liberal Government is  voting against fast tracking their own small business legislation. It really was an  episode of stupidity in the nation and we need to do better from our Government.    

 JOURNALIST: Can I just get your reaction to the Royal Commission into trade  unions, there was story into today’s Australian suggesting that workers for Clean  Event would have lost penalty rates. Did you sign off on that sort of deal in  2006 when you were the secretary of the TWU?    

 SHORTEN: Well first of all I'm not going to provide a running commentary on the  Royal Commission. The Royal Commission's got its path to pursue. We’ve had a  policy of not making running commentary and I'm not going to start today.    

 JOURNALIST: On superannuation, do you believe that you can win this  issue coming up to the next election given the Government is now increasingly  confused on their position?    

 SHORTEN: Well we've got the Government disturbingly at odds. You’ve got the  elected representatives disagreeing with their chief economic adviser. The  Government's chief economic adviser, the fulltime public servant whose day job  is to provide Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey with financial advice about the  sensible maintenance of Australia’s economic future has said that the existing  superannuation tax concessions at the top end do need to be reviewed, I mean  that’s the import of what he said, no doubt. Yet you've got the Government, Tony  Abbott, stuck in one of those sort of promised self-made booby traps where  he says there will be never ever any changes to superannuation. I mean he said  before the last election that he wouldn't cut pensions, cut education, cut health,  you know the spiel that he gave before the last election, he broke all of that.    

 Now he's stuck in this never ever thing where he says that the superannuation,  the unsustainable concessions at the high end. When we talk  about unsustainable, let's be clear, Australians are smarter than Tony Abbott  treats them. If he wants to say that if Labor proposes reducing a tax concession,  a tax concession, in other words if you've got $2 million in superannuation  and you're in retirement and you’re earning an income of $100,000 interest, very  few thousand of our fellow Australians will ever get $100,000 in interest from their  superannuation nest egg, we're proposing that you pay a reduction in the  tax concession.    

 See at the moment, under Tony Abbott's view of the world, every taxpayer  in Australia, millions of us, reward people who already have millions of dollars  in superannuation, get massive flows of interest from them and he says we don't  want them to pay any tax at all. Yet what he would do to pensioners is effectively  give them a tax hike on their pension and punish part pensioners. Tony Abbott's  created an unsustainable system and because he's so desperate to hang on  to his job and tell people what he thinks they want to hear, he just won't tell them  the truth.    

 JOURNALIST: On the Cambodian refugee deal, there's still no evidence that the  first four have actually made it there. What's Labor's position on the deal?    

 SHORTEN: Well we need to see the detail. We do support regional resettlement.  Let's be very clear, despite the Government trying to say something else, that’s  not the case. We do support regional resettlement. But this Government is  addicted to secrecy. How many millions of dollars of taxpayer’s money are they  paying for a few people to be resettled? I think that, as much as I would like to 

 help with the answer to your question, it's time for the Government to answer to  Australians how they're spending taxpayer money.    

 JOURNALIST: It’s $55 million so far and is that an appropriate cost?    

 SHORTEN: How many people have they said so far they're resettling?    

 JOURNALIST: Four so far.    

 SHORTEN: Four for $55 million does seem - is very expensive. Taxpayers would  rightly say, $55 million, what are we getting value for it, people going to work  every day. To be fair the Government just needs to explain what they're  doing. Why does the Government think that Australians are stupid and think that  they don't need to be taken into the confidence of the Government about  what's going on? I mean, when this Government wants to damage each other,  when the Ministers want each other's jobs they'll stop and hold a press  conference or ring up their favourite journalist, but when it comes to important  matters, being straight with the use of taxpayers money or indeed fast tracking  small business legislation, this Government's entirely distracted.    

 JOURNALIST: On the issue of the small business legislation, was this just a  stunt on your part given that the Senate isn't sitting this week? It can still be  brought up before June 30th.    

 SHORTEN: I don't know if you saw the Question Time where Tony  Abbott challenged Labor to help fast track this legislation. Remember he loves to  give a lecture, I mean he's never so comfortable as when he's the Leader of the  Opposition and he challenged us to agree with him. It was dishonest of  him because I shook hands with him the morning after the Budget, it was on  television, it was in the ABC studio, and I said, listen I don't like what you're doing  in health and education but the small business stuff looks good.    

 So we've had a very clear support for small business and remember Tony Abbott  making a hero of himself in Question Time, loves to sort of stand up there and  yell at the Opposition and, you know, will you agree with small business  reform? And we said yes and today we said, bring it on. The question is why is  this Government so distracted, so slow-footed that when Labor votes to fast-track  a better deal for small business the Government's united against opposing fast  tracking. The Government's got some explaining to do to small business. If  they're in such a hurry to help small business, why were they so slow today?    

 JOURNALIST: But they’d still have to wait, given that the Senate isn't sitting.    

 SHORTEN: First of all, you saw Tony Abbott say, when will Labor get this  legislation through? The House of Reps, they could of had it through an  hour ago. I think the Government's got some explaining to do. Sorry, there's just  a student journalist here today. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Hi, I’m Nelson [inaudible] from Dickson College. I’d just like to  say most of us at Dickson want to go to university and what would Labor's  response be to the proposed increase in university fees in the future?    

 SHORTEN: We really oppose Christopher Pyne and Tony Abbott's plans to  create $100,000 degrees. We want you to go to university. We want you to get  the skills. We want you to be the best that you can be. Labor understands and  hears the voice of young Australians. We don't want to price Australians out of  going to university. We believe that it's how hard you work and the marks you  get which is what gets you to university, not how much money your parents have.  That's why Labor in particular in the area of what the students here are studying,  science, technology, engineering and maths, not only are we saying that we  oppose what Christopher Pyne’s doing about make it harder for kids to go to  university by $100,000 degrees, we're actually going forward and further and  better. We’re proposing that 100,000 students get their HECS written off if  they successfully complete their degrees because we want the workforce of the  future to be as smart and adaptable as their parents expect Governments  to support them.    

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, Malcolm Turnbull has implied that stripping  citizenship from Australians who aren't dual nationals is a bridge too far. I know  you haven't seen any legislation or anything like that but what do you think of that  as an idea?    

 SHORTEN: What do I think about Malcolm Turnbull disagreeing with  Tony Abbott?    

 JOURNALIST: No, about the citizenship.    

 SHORTEN: Okay, well in terms of the dual national proposal we need to see  the legislation. These provisions exist where dual nationals in time of war operate  for enemy states against Australia and so if there's a pragmatic extension to dual  nationals which helps maintain our national security, in-principle we will certainly  think about it very constructively. In terms of Malcolm Turnbull and the legislation,  there's two points to make, isn't it.    

 This is a Government who talks about national security but clearly they're divided  within their ranks. It wasn't a leak that Fairfax paper got a couple of, a few days  ago, it was a whole transcript of the debates and the arguments in the  Government. Now Governments have disagreements but the issue is this is  national security. If this Government has Ministers who are so keen to  undermine each other that they'll use national security as a football then that's  worrying for the long-term for Australia's national security.    

 The other issue I'd say here is the Government wants us to debate national  security, just like in small business they're always goading us, what do you  think, what do you think, we just want to see the legislation and I'd submit the  record of my leadership, being constructive and consistent on national security.  The Government always wants to, I think, politicise issues, and what we want to  do is take the long-term national interest.     

 Thanks, everyone. See you in Parliament.    

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053   

