---
title: "Time for Mr Shorten to decide on boats"
date: "2015-01-20"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211421438
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3614128%22
---

 Peter Dutton MP 

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Time for Mr Shorten to decide on boats 

 Tuesday, 20 January 2015 

 Labor and Opposition Leader Bill Shorten must inform Australians of their position on  illegal boat arrivals to Australia, Immigration Minister Peter Dutton said today. 

 Mr Dutton today branded the Opposition Leader's behavior over the protests at the  Manus Island Regional Processing Centre as irresponsible. 

 "Bill Shorten demonstrated his complete inexperience when it comes to border  protection and national security issues over recent days," Mr Dutton said. 

 "His calls for information to be released at sensitive times when operations were  underway to end the protests were dangerous. They could have risked harm to  people on the ground. 

 "Mr Shorten must give a direct answer to a simple question. Does he support  stopping the boats or is he another Kevin Rudd who will throw open the floodgates at  the border? 

 "The Opposition Leader must tell Australians whether he supports this government's  strong border protection measures or does he advocate a return to another 800  boats carrying more than 50,000 people illegally entering Australia." 

 "Half those boats and half that number of people arrived in the last year of the Labor  Government. Within one year of Coalition Government the boats have stopped.  Which would it be under a Bill Shorten led Labor Government?" 

 Mr Dutton today commended the PNG Government and service provider staff for  their peaceful and measured approach to resolving ongoing unrest at the Manus  RPC. 

 He said a group of transferees had continued to engage in violent and aggressive  behaviour, despite extensive efforts by staff to diffuse the situation and resolve  unrest. 

 Some transferees were coercing others to participate, were threatening staff and had  created barricades preventing the delivery of essential services and supplies. 

 This was an unacceptable and untenable situation. 

 A decision was made by the PNG authorities with the support of the Australian  Government to resolve the situation and ensure the safety and security of the Centre  and transferees. 

 "Most transferees quickly cooperated with the request to cease their action. Minimal  force was used to effect entry into one compound. A number of transferees were  restrained and taken to the local watch-house after actively attempting to prevent the  entry of service provider security staff and the provision of medical aid to fellow  transferees," Mr Dutton said. 

 "I am advised there was no damage to infrastructure or accommodation at the  Centre and there were no significant injuries sustained by staff or transferees as a  result of yesterday's actions. 

 "A group of transferees reported to International Health and Medical Services with  non-serious injuries, largely related to fatigue. 

 "There remains some underlying tension at the Centre, including instances of food  and fluid refusal, but this is being closely monitored." 

 Mr Dutton said normal services including the provision of food and water in all  compounds has resumed. 

 "Yesterday's activity was the direct result of the irresponsible actions of some  transferees which have undermined the security of the Centre and could not be  allowed to continue," he said. 

 "I would also like to note my extreme disappointment with some advocates who  encouraged and fuelled this behaviour. 

 "Now it is important that those transferees who have received a positive refugee  determination decision focus on their future in PNG. They will not be coming to  Australia. The Australian Government's policy remains unchanged." 

 

