---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 20 June 2015: Iran; relationship with Indonesia; national security; Tony Abbott's royal commission"
date: "2015-06-20"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT"
subjects:
  - "Iran"
  - "relationship with Indonesia"
  - "national security"
  - "Tony Abbott's royal commission"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/212192942
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3908276%22
---

 

 

 THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  AND INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 

 MEMBER FOR SYDNEY 

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  SYDNEY  SATURDAY, 20 JUNE 2015    

 SUBJECTS: Iran; Relationship with Indonesia; National security; Tony  Abbott’s royal commission.      

 TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks for  coming out this morning. There are a couple of things that I wanted to discuss today.  The first is our relationship with Iran, and the second is Australia’s relationship with  Indonesia. Going first to Iran, we’ve seen once again leaked reports from the  Government about Australia’s security and international relations. Here we have  Iran, a country that has had a difficult relationship with Australia and indeed a difficult  relationship with the rest of the world, reports in the newspapers suggests that  Australia might be downgrading its travel advisories for Iran. It might be making a  number of other changes to our relationship with Iran if Iran is to take back  unsuccessful asylum seekers. Now it’s extremely concerning that Australians are  learning about this, once again, through a leak from Cabinet, and it’s also extremely  concerning to imagine that Australia might trade off our travel advisories for another  reason- bargain with our travel advisories. The Government needs to explain very  clearly if there are any changes to the travel advisory warning to Iran, what has  prompted that change, what’s changed on the ground that would make Australians  any safer when visiting Iran.    

 Turning now to the relationship with Indonesia. A couple of years ago, the then  Foreign Minister, Marty Natalegawa, said that the relationship between Indonesia  and Australia had never been better. In recent weeks we’ve heard Indonesia say that  our actions have reached a new low. Before coming to government, Tony Abbott  said that his foreign policy would be more Jakarta, less Geneva. In fact, we’ve seen  our relationship under unprecedented strain. About ten days ago, the Foreign 

 Minister and the Immigration Minister flat out denied that people smugglers had been  paid to ferry around asylum seekers. They weren’t prepared to repeat that denial this  week in the Parliament and indeed the Prime Minister gave every indication that in  fact this may have happened. It is extraordinary that the Australian Government  would be offering an incentive for people smugglers to ply their vile trade, and  extraordinary that the relationship with Indonesia has reached such a low point. Any  questions?    

 JOURNALIST: So do you think it’s reasonable for Indonesia to assume that people  smugglers payments have been made?    

 PLIBERSEK: Look, I can’t comment on whether this has happened or not. We’ve  seen a lot of footage, interviews with the people smugglers themselves, with the  crew on the ship, the Indonesian police and so on, but a proper investigation should  take place in a situation like this. What is extraordinary is that we have the Foreign  Minister and the Immigration Minister flat out deny it and then the Prime Minister  seemed to indicate that this may have happened. After all their talk of taking the  sugar off the table for people smugglers, we now have a government putting the  sugar on the table.     

 JOURNALIST: Do you want the Government to come out and admit they’ve done  wrong?    

 PLIBERSEK: Well, I think they need to explain to the Australian people exactly  what’s happened here.    

 JOURNALIST: Obviously it’s quite concerning that the Indonesians are putting these  allegations out, how do you think Abbott should actually be replying to this?    

 PLIBERSEK: I think it’s important to understand; Indonesia is one Australia’s most  important strategic and economic partners. It’s a fast growing economy, directly on  our doorstep directly to our north, and having a good relationship with Indonesia is  important for our economic growth into the future, but it’s also important for security.  It is absolutely vital that the Prime Minister does what he has to to get this  relationship back on track.    

 JOURNALIST: How are you responding to Bill Shorten’s wife being [inaudible] in the  Royal Commission?    

 PLIBERSEK: Well I think it’s truly extraordinary to see some of the reporting that’s  coming out of the Royal Commission. Bill Shorten has said all along that he is  prepared to cooperate with the Royal Commission, in fact he’s asked to be able to  go to the Royal Commission earlier than he was called to answer any questions that  they might have for him. So I mean- he’ll go to the Royal Commission and they put to  him whatever questions they choose to. It would be excellent if that were done as  quickly as possible so we can get on with the important issues that face us as a  nation. We’ve got of course these troubled relations with our nearest neighbour to  the north, we’ve got these extraordinary suggestions that we are downgrading travel  warnings for Iran for a deal to do with asylum seekers. There are of course issues  that face us as a nation that we’re being diverted from. 

 

 JOURNALIST: And in relation to- you were saying they leaked this information, that  is quite concerning that again you think they’re being leaked.    

 PLIBERSEK: This Government’s whole approach to national security bears a great  deal of scrutiny. As we say, this most recent story on Iran again seems to be a leak.  We’ve had the Prime Minister talking about withdrawing Australian citizenship from  Australians. None of that information has been given directly to the Australian  people. For about 18 months now, the Government has been floating this idea, this  thought bubble, that they might revoke Australian citizenship from Australians who  fought overseas. About 18 months they’ve been talking about it, and there is still no  legislation before the Parliament. What is even more extraordinary is that no  legislation has gone to Cabinet, no legislation has gone to the national security  committee of Cabinet, when asked about it, the Prime Minister has suggested that  only two Ministers have seen legislation. We have suggestions legal advice from the  Solicitor General that such legislation might not be constitutional and might be  subject to High Court challenge. This is a mess. And what we’ve got is Tony Abbott  out there demanding bipartisanship from Labor when there’s no legislation to  scrutinise, when his own Cabinet are leaking against him, when we’ve had six  Cabinet Ministers expressing their concerns coming out of the first Cabinet meeting  where this was discussed, when there’s no agreement from the Government about  what the proposal entails and no legislation to examine. We have been talking about  this quite long enough, the Prime Minister should release draft legislation to be  examined. Labor has said all along that when it comes to national security, we put  the interests of Australia first. We are determined to do what’s in the best interests of  Australia to keep Australians safe. When other pieces of national security legislation  have been released, we’ve endeavoured to be bipartisan. Those pieces of legislation  have been improved by examination by the Joint Parliamentary Committee on  Security and Intelligence. The same scrutiny should improve any further legislation.  Of course, if the Government says to us that they are interested in updating  Australia’s national security legislation so that people who would have previously lost  their citizenship because they fought with an army of a nation with which we are at  war, updating those provisions to include non-state actors like Daesh, ISIS, ISIL,  whatever you want to call it, then we’ve said we’re inclined to support such a  measure. If the legislation goes beyond that, it would be very important for the Prime  Minister to release it so that it may be examined properly by the Parliament.     

 JOURNALIST: [Inaudible] problem passing the legislation of revoking citizenship,  where do you think he’s gotten this idea from if you’ve found lots of legal experts to  say it’s not a good idea?    

 PLIBERSEK: I think it’s important to note that six members of his own Cabinet have  objected to the idea so far. That there is no draft legislation that’s been circulated  either to the Cabinet, to the national security committee of the Cabinet, to the  Parliament, there’s been no details discussed with Labor. The Solicitor General and  the former independent national security legislation monitor have raised questions  about the legislation as it’s been described by the Government. We can reduce  confusion and increase people’s feelings of security by releasing the legislation so  that it can properly examined by the Government’s own legal advisers, by the  Parliament itself, by the relevant Parliamentary Committee and really, I would have 

 thought most importantly to the Prime Minister, by his own Cabinet and his own  national security committee of the Cabinet. It is extraordinary that the Prime Minister-  he’s said all along that this legislation will be introduced before the Parliament rises  and so far we’ve seen nothing.    

 JOURNALIST: Tanya, there’s been polls suggesting that you would make a more  preferred Opposition Leader. Do you have your sights set on the leadership anytime  in the future?    

 PLIBERSEK: I have my sights set on being part of a great Labor team. Thank you.     

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350   

