---
title: "Senate inquiry to examine abuse, conditions and the collapse of law on Nauru"
date: "2015-03-24"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211425481
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3733401%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE    

 Tuesday, 24 March 2015    

 Senate inquiry to examine abuse, conditions and the collapse of law on Nauru    

 The Australian Greens have been joined by the former magistrate of Nauru, Peter Law,  and refugee advocates around the country in calling for a Senate inquiry into the  situation on Nauru.    

 The inquiry would focus on conditions within the detention centre, allegations of serious  sexual abuse and the breakdown of the legal and judicial systems on the island, the  Greens’ immigration spokesperson Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said.    

 “We need to shine a light in to the dark places on Nauru,” Senator Hanson-Young said.    

 “It can no longer be denied that children are intentionally being put in harm’s way on  Nauru.    

 “The evidence contained in the Moss Report was shocking, but it also raised as many  questions as it answered.    

 “The collapse of the judicial, legal and political systems on the island means that the  asylum seekers there have no access to justice. I have no faith that the guards who  have committed heinous crimes against women and children will ever pay for their  actions.    

 “There is no accountability or rule of law on Nauru and a full Parliamentary inquiry is the  only way to reveal the truth.    

 “Detention centre staff who have worked on Nauru deserve to have the legal protections  that come with giving evidence to a Parliamentary inquiry. They are the ones with the  firsthand knowledge of what’s really going on there and they need to have their say,  despite the government’s gag clause.    

 “This inquiry will lift the lid on the foul reality of the Nauru detention camp. The sooner  that can happen, the better.”    

 

 Media Contact: Noah Schultz-Byard 0427 604 760   

