---
title: "Budget estimates: what Tony Abbott doesn't want you to know"
date: "2015-06-06"
creators:
  - "Wong, Penny"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211886836
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3881781%22
---

 

 SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INVESTMENT  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA 

 

 BUDGET ESTIMATES: WHAT TONY ABBOTT DOESN’T WANT YOU TO KNOW   

 Tony Abbott’s pre-election promise to “restore accountability and improve  transparency” was reduced to little more than a sick joke during the past fortnight of  Senate Budget Estimates.     

 In breach of Mr Abbott’s promise and his ministerial “standards”, Ministers refused to  answer simple questions and ran interference during questioning by Labor and  crossbench Senators.     

 Much of the Estimates round was a demonstration of the lengths to which Mr  Abbott’s Ministers will go to stop Australians learning about the things the Prime  Minister doesn’t want us to know.    

 In the Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee the Abbott Government maintain a  veil of secrecy on asylum seeker vessels. Senators were provided with almost no  information about the turnback and towback of vessels since the last Estimates.    

 The Department of Immigration and Border Protection failed to explain why  thousands of letters of support addressed to asylum seekers at the Nauru Offshore  Processing Centre had not been delivered - despite it being 11 months since the  issue was raised.    

 The Government chair of the Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee even  sought to block questions about the Regional Processing Centre in Nauru - despite  the millions of dollars involved and serious questions about the Abbott Government’s  management of facility.    

 Arts Minister, Senator George “bookshelves” Brandis, refused to explain how his  new arts slush fund will work. He admitted he has not finalised guidelines for funding  decisions, and had consulted with no one in the arts community before the  announcement.    

 Over in the Finance and Public Administration Committee, the Department of  Parliamentary Services denied any responsibility for the wage cuts to the 

 hardworking cleaners at Parliament House which followed the revocation by the  Abbott Government of the Commonwealth Cleaning Services Guidelines.     

 Our biggest spending Finance Minister ever, Senator Mathias Cormann, refused to  release his “forensic audit” into the Air Warfare Destroyer program, while being  forced to admit he hadn’t bothered to read the full report before putting out a press  release attacking the ASC.     

 Senator Cormann also invented a new rule that any questions relating to taxpayer-funded ministerial staff must be taken on notice for privacy reasons, despite  questions remaining over exactly who ordered the Ambassador for France’s partner  to remain in the car when Mr Abbott arrived in Paris.  

 

 In yet another breach of its election commitments, the Government confirmed White  Papers on Agriculture, Northern Australia and the Federation hadn’t been released  within 12 months of the election, and couldn’t tell when they would see the light of  day.  In a rare slip, officials revealed PM&C had spent a staggering $8.5 million on 

 these yet-to-be-released papers.    

 The Rural, Regional Affairs and Transport Committee confirmed that Mr Abbott still  has not handed over all the documents relating to the sacking of former Department  of Agriculture Secretary, Dr Paul Grimes, despite his promises to do so.    

 In the Environment and Communications Committee, the NBN CEO Bill Morrow was  asked to release NBN Co’s latest cost, revenue and rollout forecasts to the public.  He refused to tell Senators how his executives plan to spend the $29.5 billion  entrusted to them by the taxpayers of Australia.     

 This week in the Community Affairs Committee, departmental officials couldn’t  provide a definition of “medical research” that would be funded under the proposed  Medical Research Future Fund.   

 The Government also refused to reveal the target of the $700 million cut from crucial  health programs tackling drug and alcohol abuse, chronic disease, communicable  diseases and rural health issues over the next four years, leaving health  organisations in the dark about where the cuts will fall.    

 Meanwhile, the Department of Social Services refused to outline the long term  impact of the Government’s Paid Parental Leave cuts. Questions about how many  women would be affected and how much they would lose were taken on notice  despite the cuts being announced in the Budget only a fortnight ago.     

 The same was true for child care, with the Department of Social Services unable to  say how many families will have their access to child care cut, or will be pushed out  of the system entirely, as a result of the Government’s policy changes. This non-answer comes despite Labor writing to the Government on at least six occasions  requesting this information.            

 Over in the Defence, Foreign Affairs and Trade Committee Estimates, the  Government’s “Competitive Evaluation Process” for Australia’s Future Submarines 

 was further exposed as a sham designed by a Prime Minister desperate to save his  political skin and fulfil his secret deal with Japan.     

 Defence officials revealed that the Abbott Government had not sought formal written  advice from the Defence Department before Mr Abbott announced his sham  “Competitive Evaluation Process”. Defence Secretary, Dennis Richardson, was also  unable to recall whether anybody other than himself had been consulted prior to the  Prime Minister announcing the process.    

 The Secretary of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Peter Varghese, refused to answer  questions about his knowledge of the Brady Incident - referring Senators to media  reports the Government had previously claimed were baseless. Senator Brandis took  his job representing the Minister for Foreign Affairs so seriously that he was spotted  reading bush poetry during questioning on Wednesday night.    

 In the Economics Committee, Senator Cormann’s obstructiveness also reached new  heights by continually blocking questions directed at the new Treasury Secretary,  John Fraser.     

 It also became clear that the Government has absolutely no idea what the fiscal  impact of its main multinational tax measure will be because no costings were  prepared ahead of its inclusion in the Budget.     

 In the Education and Employment Committee, Education officials admitted they have  no idea what the $5 million left over from the Government’s failed higher education  advertising campaign will be spent on - apart from more advertising. They did admit  over $250,000 has been spent on focus groups and market research, with a further  $1 million committed to designing the campaign.    

 The hapless Education Minister, Christopher Pyne, continues to resist the release  under FOI of around 2,500 pages of documents held by his office and Department  relating to the establishment of the Bjorn Lomborg Australian Consensus Centre.  

 

 The Employment Department was entirely unable to provide details on the  employment effects of the Government’s small business and jobs package.    

 The Coalition-appointed Director of Fair Work Building and Construction failed to  answer a range of questions from Labor on the operation of his agency.    

 Having heard evidence from both the Australian Public Service Commission and the  Department of Employment at Budget Senate Estimates, it is clear the Government  is nowhere near fixing the impasse in bargaining across the Australian Public Sector.   

 When the Government did disclose something of significance to Senate Estimates -  that a letter written by Sydney siege gunman Man Monis to Senator Brandis had  been provided to an official inquiry - it proved to be wrong.     

 This Estimates round demonstrated the Abbott Government’s ongoing contempt for  transparency and accountability.    

 Labor will continue to hold the Government to account when Parliament next sits in  one week’s time.     

 SATURDAY, 6 JUNE 2015   

