---
title: "Offshore processing: the way forward: speech to the Sydney Institute, Sydney"
date: "2015-12-03"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/221058699
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4244241%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO 

 SPEECH TO THE SYDNEY INSTITUTE - OFFSHORE PROCESSING: THE WAY  FORWARD 

 SYDNEY 

 THURSDAY, 3 DECEMBER 2015 

 *** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY *** 

 It is a pleasure to be back here speaking at the Sydney Institute. For 26 years the  Sydney  Institute  has  been  a  centre  for  reasoned  debate  about  Australian public  policy and there is no area where this is needed more than the debate surrounding  asylum seekers and Australian immigration.  

 Because  in  recent  years  this  debate  has  been  toxic  and  its  impact  on  modern   multicultural Australia has been damaging. 

 It has been this way for almost 15 years - since 2001 - when John Howard used the  Tampa  affair  to  stir  a  hornet’s  nest  of  xenophobia,  fear  and  mistrust  in  the   community.  

 And  in  the  process,  of  harnessing  and  exploiting  the  sentiment  of  a  shell  shocked   public in  the  aftermath  of  the  September  11  terrorist  attacks,  a  wily Prime  Minister   wrong footed Labor and set all of us on a course that until quite recently has required  grappling with ugly politics amid an already complex policy debate. 

 Immigration should be a bipartisan issue. The handling of asylum seekers should be  a bipartisan issue. But once one Party allowed the partisan genie out of the bottle,  and a genie at that which appealed to the darkest angels of our nature, it has been  very difficult to put it back again. 

 Changing the nature of this debate has been my mission statement from the time I  became the Shadow Minister for Immigration. 

 To do this, it has been Labor’s belief that immigration policy cannot be determined by  reference to achieving political outcomes but rather by the values which are common  to us as Australians. We need to be wary of policy positions which lend themselves  to an election billboard and embrace policy positions which help save lives and give  expression to a generous Australian contribution to the world’s humanitarian need. 

 So over the last two years Labor has sought to develop policy based on the values of  generosity, fairness and compassion. We have measured every step we have taken  by asking the question as to whether that step will reduce the sum of global human  misery. 

 Accordingly, at the ALP National Conference earlier this year, the party engaged in  an open and frank discussion about what policy settings we would adopt in the next  Labor Government. 

 The  focus  of  much  of  the  media  attention  at  our  National  Conference  was  on  the   issue of whether a Labor Government would turn back asylum seeker vessels if safe  to do so. Importantly, it was resolved to allow a future Labor Government the option  of using so-called “turn backs” as part of a broader arsenal of tools to deter vessels  from making the perilous journey from Java to Christmas Island. 

 We could have opted to dodge the subject, kicking it down the road and avoiding the  difficult conversation and process that followed.  

 However,  that  would  have  been  more  than  just  an  act  of  political  convenience  - it  would have been act of policy recklessness that would have been projected into the  murky underground world of people smugglers as a glimmer of hope that they could  revive their trade in human misery under a future Labor Government. 

 That someone in Jakarta - a former people smuggler now driving a taxi because he  is out of business - is monitoring Australian domestic politics waiting for a sign that  he can start marketing the deadly journey to desperate people is sadly not a myth.  

 And it shows the details in this policy area are very much issues of life and death.  

 They are facts that cannot be ignored in setting policies in this area.  

 Putting people smugglers out of business is what drove Labor in 2013 to heed the  advice  of  the  Expert  Panel  on  Asylum  Seekers  and  put  in  place  the  Regional   Resettlement  Arrangement  with  PNG  and  Nauru.  This  has  actually  been  the  most   important  decision  of  any Australian  Government  in  bringing  an  end  to  the  journey  from Java to Christmas Island. 

 It was a decision that created a circuit breaker by removing any reason for people to  embark on unseaworthy vessels and pursue the dangerous and, all too often, deadly  journey that saw some 1200 men, women and children die on our border. 

 The  fact  we  have  seen  no  drownings  at  sea  since  2013  is  without  a  doubt  a   remarkable accomplishment. 

 In  the  face  of  our  difficult  decision  at  National  Conference  there  were  people  who   were fierce in their criticism.  

 Some people responded to our policy decisions by saying that they didn’t accept the  “drownings  argument”.  I  find  this  utterly  abhorrent.  What  we  saw  play  out  on  our   borders over the last few years was not an argument. It happened. 1200 people lost  their  lives  and  this  can’t  be  ignored  just  because  it  doesn’t  fit  comfortably  with  a   particular argument. 

 Other people responded by saying we have simply pushed our problems elsewhere  and that asylum seekers are drowning on someone else’s watch. This is completely  incorrect. Our intelligence agencies and public servants have good visibility on this.  And there is no evidence that this has occurred at all. To the contrary, the evidence  is that lives have been saved.  

 In  parroting  these  lines  - people  are  actually  refusing  to  acknowledge  that  we  no   longer have our customs and navy personnel facing the morbid task of pulling bodies  from the sea. 

 In  truth  there  is  nothing  compassionate  about  people  dying  at  sea  and  this  was  a   human tragedy that all of us had to bring to an end. 

 This  debate  was  tough  for  Labor  but  it  was  a  defining  moment  for  Bill  Shorten  as   leader of a modern Labor party. 

 At the time of dealing with the issue of stopping the journey from Java to Christmas  Island, National Conference was meeting at a moment in history when the world has  been experiencing its greatest humanitarian need since the Second World War. 

 If compassion and generosity were to be our guide then this also demanded that we  propose Australia play a larger role in global humanitarian affairs than we ever have  before. 

 And  so  we  announced  that  under  Labor,  Australia’s  humanitarian  intake  would   increase  to  27,000  places  with  a  portion  of  that  figure  dedicated  to  resettling   refugees from our region. 

 We said that a future Labor Government would play a leadership role in building a  regional  humanitarian  framework  in  South  East  Asia  to  improve  the  situation  of   asylum seekers. This would see us supporting the UNHCR in providing health and  education services to asylum seekers. It would see us advocating for work rights for  asylum  seekers,  similar  to  what  would  have  been  achieved  under  the  Malaysia   Agreement in 2011. 

 We also promised a dramatic increase in our funding to the UNHCR of $450 million  over four years taking Australia to a position where we would be one of the top five  global contributors to this agency’s vital work. 

 Together this represents the largest offering of any potential Australian Government  to  the  world’s  humanitarian  affairs.  It  is  an  emphatic  statement  that  under  Labor   Australia  would  take  its  place  among  those  nations  in  the  World  which  are  at  the   forefront  of  providing  humanitarian  assistance.  And  it  stands  in  stark  contrast  to  a   Conservative  Government  which  by  and  large  has  seen  the  ending  of  the  journey   from Java to Christmas Island not as an act of compassion but rather as the central  piece of an architecture which is about Australia turning its back on the world.  

 As positive as National Conference was for Federal Labor in establishing a soundly  values  based  position  on  asylum  seeker  and  immigration  policy,  the  experience  of   developing  it  over  the  last  two  years  has  highlighted  for  me  just  how  much  large   parts of this debate are irrational and uninformed. 

 I can’t point to any other policy area that is so mired in emotion, misinformation and  hysteria. And one where inconvenient facts are cast aside in pursuit of rallying catch  cries and platitudes. 

 Both the Liberal Government and Greens Party have been the victors in this arena. 

 The  Greens  Party  has  frequently  and  recklessly  perpetuated  the  notion  that   detention  centres  are  hotbeds  of  violence,  located  in  nations  that  are  lawless  and   whose populations are complicit in it. 

 And the Liberal Government, while Scott Morrison was Minister turned political chest  beating  into  an  art  form:  a  hero  of  the  Daily  Telegraph  and  conqueror  of  hard  line   policy that was at the heart of the conservative Abbott Government. 

 In fact there was so much zeal within the Government for its “stop the boats policy”  that Mr Abbott routinely took to the world stage to offer up his policy as some kind of  global panacea.  

 The battle for a reasoned debate is still to be won. 

 Having  hopefully  seen  an  end  to  the  journey  from  Java  to  Christmas  Island  and   having articulated a much greater humanitarian role for Australia within the world, the  biggest legacy issue about which all of us should now be concerned is how we are  treating the people who have already made the journey and are living in Australian  funded facilities. 

 There  are  real  concerns  about  the  pace  at  which  the  30,000  asylum  seekers  in   Australia  are  being  processed.  Labor  maintains  our  opposition  to  Temporary   Protection  Visas  and  the  fast-track  Immigration  Assessment  Authority  which  deny   those seeking Australia’s protection from  accessing a  robust refugee  determination 

 process. But quite apart from the manner in which people are being assessed, the  appalling  timeliness  of  this  process  is  leaving  tens  of  thousands  within  our   community in a state of limbo and with ever deteriorating mental health. 

 But  an  even  more  pressing  issue  is  the  fate  of  the  near  2,000  people  on  Manus   Island and Nauru. 

 The  future  of  the  detention  facilities  on  Manus  Island  and  Nauru  has  become  the   new hotspot of the asylum seeker debate.  

 Any sensible consideration of this issue must begin with the role that these facilities  have played in bringing an end to the dangerous journey at sea. It is utterly clear that  the closing of these facilities or the bringing of any of the asylum seekers to Australia  will  result  in  asylum  seeker  vessels  being put on  the water once  more  and  people  drowning at sea again. Manus Island and Nauru must never be seen as a stopover  on the way to Australia. And it is simply intellectually dishonest to advocate for the  closure  of  the  facilities  on  the  one  hand  and  not  accept  the  responsibility  for  the   consequences on the other.  

 Those who advocate in this way deal themselves out of the debate. 

 In pursuit of an agenda of breaking the detention facilities on Nauru and Manus there  are some voices who have spread fantastic claims of misinformation about what is  occurring  in  these  places.  Much  of  this  ultimately  focuses  on  an  appalling   characterisation of Nauruans and Manusians as being lawless and dangerous.  

 Crime exists on both islands and in both communities as it does everywhere in the  world. But to assert that Nauruan men are habitually rapists or that Manusians are  extremely violent is obviously offensive and bigoted.  

 It  bemuses  me  that  people  who  come  to  this  debate  wearing  the  mantle  of   compassion can think that it is OK in the pursuit of an agenda to engage in a free-for-all  on  these  island  communities. We  are  well  to  remember  that  if  there  are  two   populations  in  the  world  to  whom  Australia  has  a  particular  responsibility  it  is   Nauruans and Papua New Guineans. These are the two countries that gained their  independence  from  us.  And  it  is  critical  in  this  debate  that  we  do  not  drift  into  the   space demeaning peoples who look to us as their global best friend. 

 Of  course,  having  rumour  presented  as  fact  is  the  collateral  damage  of  this   Government’s hopeless lack of transparency over offshore detention facilities. It has  created  a  breeding  ground  for  people  to  easily  cast  all  facilities  as  terrible,  unsafe   and  violent.  This  simply  should  not  be  how  a  modern  country  like  Australia  goes   about its business. 

 Transparency  is  the  disinfectant  of  bad  policy.  We  cannot  expect  the  support  and   confidence  of the  Australian  people  in  Australian  Government action  if  they cannot  see that action for themselves. 

 So a Labor Government would seek to negotiate with PNG and Nauru independent  oversight  of  these  facilities  as  an  important  integrity  measure  to  start  rebuilding   community confidence in the centres we fund.  

 We  would  make  it  very clear  that  all  those  working  within  these  facilities  would  be   expected to speak out when they see a wrong.  

 And we already have introduced a private members bill into Parliament to make it an  offence  not  to  report  signs  of  child  abuse  where  these  are  observed  by  those   working in these facilities.  

 Perhaps the biggest issue associated with this misinformation is that it distracts from  the very real issues surrounding the fate of the asylum seekers on Manus Island and  Nauru.   

 I believe the Turnbull Government has been utterly negligent in its duty of care to the  men at the Manus Island facility and the men, women and children at the Australian  funded facility on Nauru. 

 The Labor Party’s resolve to ensure people do not again die off our shores in pursuit  of  asylum  should  not  be  misjudged  as  Labor  endorsing  the  way  this  Government   operates its processing facilities. 

 There  is  no  legitimate  reason  why  two  years  after  coming  to  Government,  this   Government has thought it acceptable to have asylum seekers in Nauru still housed  in tents.  

 When Labor left office it had planned to finish the construction of the facility on Nauru  which would have seen everyone living in hard walled facilities. On coming to office  the then Immigration Minister Scott Morrison quickly stopped this work and actively  kept people living in tents. 

 Earlier  this  year,  I  visited  the  Zaatari  refugee  camp,  some  ten  kilometres  from  the   Syrian border in Jordan. It is run by the UNHCR in co-operation with the Jordanian  authorities  and  provides  refuge  to  more  than  80,000  men,  women and  children   fleeing conflict in Syria. 

 In almost the same time period as the operation of the facility on Nauru, the UNHCR  has  rolled  out  hard  walled  accommodation  which  offers  dignity  in  difficult   circumstances. The locks on the doors offer safety, privacy and peace of mind. 

 So  why did  the  Australian  Government leave people  to  languish  in exposed  tents?  Why  has  it  not  demonstrated  any  sort  of  willingness  to  provide  humane  and  safe   conditions for the people in these centres? 

 Why has it allowed itself to be so carried away in its fervour for slogans and chest  beating that it has ignored the conditions of people looking to us for safety? 

 Everything we know now, and at the time that Minister Morrison made the decision to  keep people living in tents, is that to do so will see higher rates of domestic violence  and sexual assault. This is exactly what the Moss Review and Labor’s Senate inquiry  has ultimately found. 

 And the facility on Manus Island has also been the subject of terrible decisions about  conditions  for  those  living  within  it.  We  saw  a  substandard  medical  facility  kept  in   place for far too long. To be fair the new medical facility recently opened in June is  state  of  the art. But its opening comes too  late  for Hamid  Kehazaei who  died  as a  result of preventable septicaemia while receiving care in the old temporary medical  clinic put together with shipping containers. 

 Since  coming  to  office  the  Turnbull  Government  has  mismanaged  Australia’s   relationship with PNG.  

 Minister Morrison failed to meaningfully engage with the Government of Papua New  Guinea for most of his reign as Immigration Minister. It was months before he had a  discussion with his counterpart in PNG about the resettlement of asylum seekers in  PNG under the Regional Resettlement Arrangement.  

 It took the death of, Reza Berati, an asylum seeker within the Manus facility for him  to  launch  structured  bi-lateral  talks  with  PNG  about  this  issue.  Not  surprisingly  the   Cornall  Report  into  the  riots  which  occurred  within  the  facility  found  that  the  most  significant problem within the facility was a lack of processing and resettlement.  

 It is only now, more than two years after the RRA was signed, that we are starting to  see some signs of resettlement in PNG. 

 The Turnbull Government likes to quietly imply that the fault here lies with the PNG  Government. Yet this is nothing more than buck passing. 

 Let’s not forget it was PNG that came to the table and offered to help Australia find a  solution  to  the  deaths occurring off  our shores. PNG is the  one  providing Australia  with help. 

 For this to  be  a  sustainable  policy setting it absolutely requires us  to  work hand  in  glove with the PNG Government. Where there are areas that need to be improved -  we  need  to  demonstrate  not  just  a  willingness  to  have  the  difficult  conversations  when  they  are  needed,  but  actively  play  a  role  so  the  Australian  community  has   confidence Australian funded facilities are humane and safe. 

 There are many skilled men amongst the asylum seekers on Manus Island who will  be able to settle in PNG and secure work in industries like the mining sector, just as  many Australians  have  who  work  in  PNG  today.  For  these  people  PNG  remains  a   perfectly viable resettlement option.  

 But  to  really  resolve  the  fate  of  the  bulk  of  asylum  seekers  on  Manus  Island  and  Nauru there needs to be a credible third country option negotiated by the Australian  Government. In this, the Coalition Government has been a signal failure. 

 We have seen the Government engage in a scatter gun approach that has seen the  Liberals spend $55 million to resettle 4, now 3 refugees in Cambodia. 

 This  is  an  arrangement  which  we  learnt  more  about  from  the  Cambodian   Government than our own, and I suppose given the expenditure and low take up rate  is it any surprise that this is one immigration story the Government didn’t brief out to  the Telegraph. 

 We  routinely  hear  of  discussions  with  foreign  governments  about  resettlement   arrangements  that  never  eventuate. We  had  the  Philippines on  the  table,  until  that  Government  ruled  them  out  as  a  permanent solution.  And  only last  month  we  had   the bizarre notion of Kyrgyzstan being floated as a potential resettlement option. 

 Of  course,  from  Opposition,  Labor  does  not  have  the  capacity  to  begin  these   negotiations  in  earnest.  However,  it  would  be  a  first  order  of  business  for  a  Labor   Government  to  pursue  this.  And  in  doing  so  a  Labor  Government  would  start  by   working  with  the  UNHCR  to  seek  their  input  about  appropriate  and  viable  third   country resettlement arrangements. 

 But in the absence of this step the Government has no real long term answer as to  what will happen to these asylum seekers and refugees. 

 It is not feasible to see the long term settlement of 1,000 refugees in Nauru on the  existing  population  of  10,000  on  a  remote  island  with  few  natural  resources  in  the   middle of the Pacific. Right now the economic stimulus associated with the detention  facility  affords  a  certain  degree  of  forbearance  by  the  people  of  Nauru  with  the   burden  they  have  been  asked  to  shoulder.  But  once  this  is  diminished  as  the   detention facility winds down the consequences of leaving the refugee population on  Nauru are enormous. Without resolution Australia will not only be doing damage to  the refugees but we will be doing damage to an entire country. 

 And on Manus Island the detrimental consequences for men being housed together  over a long period of time away from their families with total uncertainty about their  future is self-evident. 

 If  the  2000  people  currently  living  on  Nauru  and  Manus  Island  are  still  there  in  5   years - even 2 years - from now, we would have done them enormous harm. 

 As  a  nation  we  will  have  completely  abrogated  our  responsibility  to  provide  safe,   humane and dignified refuge to these people. 

 Australia will have added to - not reduced - the sum of global human misery. 

 The next step for the Turnbull Government is patently clear.  

 Australia must redefine its relationship with the UNHCR. It is this which will bring our  nation in from the cold and offer some sort of hope that sensible conversations can  be had about the future of those asylum seekers and refugees on Nauru and Manus  Island. 

 It  is  this  which  was  at  the  heart  of  the  policy  package  Labor  announced  at  our   National Conference in July.  

 And the need to rebuild the relationship with the UNHCR should not be a surprise to  Malcolm Turnbull.  

 From  the  outset  the  Coalition  have  sought  to  distance  itself  from  the  UNHCR  and   deride it as the global custodian of humanitarian affairs. 

 Former  Minister  Morrison  carried  as  a  badge  of  honour  shutting  the  door  on  the   UNHCR,  saying: “Australia’s  border  protection  policies  are  made  in  Australia,   nowhere else.” 

 And the former Prime Minister, Tony Abbott said: “I really think Australians are sick  of  being  lectured  to  by  the  United  Nations,  particularly,  particularly  given  that  we   have stopped the boats.” 

 Given  the  disdain  with  which  they  treated  the  global  body,  is  it  any  wonder  this   Government  has  been  forced  to go  it  alone  and  trade  on  the  edges  in  trying  to   desperately secure a resettlement option. 

 Without taking this step of re-engaging with the UNHCR another human tragedy will  play  out,  this  time  within  the  Australian  funded  detention  facilities  on  Nauru  and   Manus Island. 

 The decision in September to take 12,000 Syrian refugees is certainly a step in the  right direction. In it we saw a hope of the emergence of a new bipartisanship about  Australia as a generous nation which engages with the UNHCR. But there remains  much work to be done if this hope is to be translated into a reality. 

 And so for Labor the taking of this step would be our first order of business. And we  would  invite  the  Government  to  take  it  with  us  and  join  us  in  a  new  bipartisanship   about asylum seekers and immigration  which  lays to  rest the terrible  debate  of  the  last fifteen years for good.  

 ENDS 

