---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 8 September 2015: Syrian refugee crisis"
date: "2015-09-08"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Syrian refugee crisis"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/215658225
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4062709%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 8 SEPTEMBER 2015   

 SUBJECT/S: Syrian refugee crisis. 

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Again this morning, Labor is  encouraging Mr Abbott to step up to this humanitarian crisis. Sometimes you can't pick  circumstances and indeed events pick us, but it is time for Australia, I believe, to offer  another 10,000 refugee places to the victims of the terrible Syrian and Iraq conflicts.  This would be 10,000 on top of the existing 13,750 places.  

 The whole world is trying to grapple with this challenging problem. I believe that  Australia has a role to play in assisting the international movement to respond to the  problems that the neighbours of Syria are facing, and more importantly the population of  Syria. Happy to take any questions.   

 JOURNALIST: Is 10,000 Labor’s final position?  

 SHORTEN: Well we haven't heard Mr Abbott's initial position yet. What I say in essence  is this - Mr Abbott, please, we can't just simply substitute some refugees from other  regions of the world and put Syrian refugees in their place. We need to lift the overall  number, that's the essence of what Labor's proposing and we also say let's do this  together. This is not politics as usual, this is not business as usual. we've suggested a  meeting of the Opposition and the Government, state leaders, community organisations  and of course religious organisations, and finally we're proposing that there be $100  million provided to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to make sure  that we can provide timely assistance to the neighbouring countries where literally  millions of Syrians are living in poverty and destitution, and great hardship.  

 JOURNALIST: Is 10,000 to conservative just given that Ewen Jones is saying 50,000.  So there's other much higher numbers being floated. 

 SHORTEN: There's no doubt that there's higher numbers being floated. Labor is open  for a discussion of above 10,000, so let's not mistake that. But what we've done is  speak with our experts and understand what our settlement services can cope with. If in  the next financial year we were to take not 13,750 refugees, 23,750, that would be a  massive increase and we want to make sure that whatever generosity we extend and  the compassion that we extend, we want to make sure that we can actually absorb  those services and keep those promises. But of course we're in the market to work  constructively with Mr Abbott, because the whole world is stepping up here and  Australia should too.  

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible] the population seems to be where the Government's going  with this. Are you comfortable with that or should Islamic or Muslim people leave Syria  [inaudible]? 

 SHORTEN: Being a victim of war doesn't know a particular religion. We're interested in  making sure that minorities and oppressed groups have the access to safety. But if  you're a woman facing terrible crimes committed against you, if you're a child, a little  child potentially drowning at sea, I'm not interested in their religion I'm interested in their  safety. 

 JOURNALIST: Barnaby Joyce said this morning you can't have an answer without  working out the equation. Is money a factor in that equation? Should be looking at the  cost first? 

 SHORTEN: Well of course there'll be a real cost, of course there will. But I, you, know I  just remind Barnaby Joyce that the Pope himself has challenged the parishes of  Catholic faith all around the world to step up. There is already a real cost going on in  Turkey, in Lebanon, in Jordan. When I met senior representatives of the Turkish  Government, they explained they have millions of people in camps. If you look at Jordan  if you look at Lebanon, there is already a cost to this crisis. As we just heard on a radio  interview I did the interviewer made the point that Germany's expecting another 800,000  refugees. There is a cost where police are picking up drowned children off the beach.  So I just say to the Government, please don't be guilty of knowing the price of  everything and the value of nothing. We'll work through this issue, state governments  have said they'll step up. If we can encourage religious organisations to pick up their co-religious and help them. If we can look at communities and country towns, you know  this is not a problem beyond the wit and wisdom and compassion and generosity of  Australia to deal with.  

 JOURNALIST: Is temporary safe havens an option, a realistic option - or has it got to  be permanent resettlement? 

 SHORTEN: Well I think as Foreign Minister Bishop said there's a lot of differences  between the Kosovar solution which I think is what you're referring to, and this current  crisis. I think the idea that temporary relief when we don't know how long the Syrian civil  war and violence is going to take is sort of selling people short. So no I don’t think it is  realistic, and I don’t think it fully grasps the nature of the protracted genocidal conflict in  this part of the world.  

 JOURNALIST: What do you think of the offer to use facilities that are sitting idle by  some State Premiers? 

 SHORTEN: Sounds sensible. Again, that's why perhaps Mr Abbott should get together  people in the same room at the same time. We all know that refugee policy has been a  vexed political question in this country. There is an opportunity to do things a little  differently now when confronted with this humanitarian crisis at a massive scale. So  when you've got State Premiers giving the lead, Liberal and Labor, it's time for the  national Parliament to step up as well.  

 JOURNALIST: Is our social security and social services system have the capacity to  deal with 10,000 extra refugees all at once? 

 SHORTEN: Well our settlement services are amongst the best in the world, but your  question really goes in part to earlier questions, what's the right number. First of all let’s  accept that we need to do more than we're currently doing. Secondly let's accept that  13,750 refugees in face of what the world's dealing with is, is plainly inadequate, and  thirdly let's sit down and work it through. This is an ideal opportunity for leadership not  partisanship. One more question thanks.  

 JOURNALIST: What about if Mr Abbott decided to bring forward the increase in our  humanitarian intake to 18,750 straight away to accept more Syrian refugees, would you  support that? 

 SHORTEN: Has he said that to you? 

 JOURNALIST: No he hasn't.   

 SHORTEN: I don't know what Mr Abbott's going to do. We've said 10,000 - you know  when you look, Europe's going to take 120,000 people. I think 10,000 for a nation of our  wealth and capacity it's appropriate. This is not business as usual, this is the largest  peace time diaspora. 11.5 million Syrians have had to move, 11.5 million Syrians - that's  roughly half the population of Australia. That's like asking, you know if everyone in NSW  and Queensland just simply had to leave their homes. I hope that'll never happen here, I  don't believe that will, but I hope that if a country such as ourselves, ever experienced  some of that difficulty, that we would have some of the help that we should in this case,  extend to other people.  

 Thanks everyone, see you later.  

 ENDS 

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053 

  

