---
title: "Budget 2015: New Australian border force strengthens operation Sovereign Borders"
date: "2015-05-12"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211754075
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3828025%22
---

  12 May 2015 

  The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

  MEDIA RELEASE 

  NEW AUSTRALIAN BORDER FORCE STRENGTHENS OPERATION 

  SOVEREIGN BORDERS 

  The 2015 Budget is part of the Commonwealth Government's plan to build a strong, safe and  prosperous future for all Australians. 

  The Government's new Australian Border Force will commence operations on schedule on 1  July. Command of the Government's highly successful Operation Sovereign Borders (OSB) will  transition to the Australian Border Force by the end of this year. 

  The Minister for Immigration and Border Protection Peter Dutton said recent events in Australia  and around the world highlighted the importance of strong border security. 

  "The Australian Border Force will be an agency focused on protecting our borders with the  ability to gather intelligence and swiftly deal with existing and emerging threats across the  complete border continuum," Mr Dutton said. 

  "The officers of the ABF will play a crucial front-line role in addressing the threat of foreign  fighters and tackling organised and transnational crime. 

  "They will also ensure OSB continues to stop the people smugglers who seek to breach our  borders and prey on vulnerable men, women and children." 

  OSB's success in stopping the boats has saved countless lives, stopped the inflow on Illegal  Maritime Arrivals (IMAs) and restored the integrity of our borders and our humanitarian  immigration programme. 

  The ongoing success of OSB and its flow-on effects will deliver savings of more than $500  million in the 2015 Budget. 

  By halting the flood of IMAs who were continually filling detention centres across Australia under  Labor, the Government has been able to empty and close many of the 17 additional detention  centres opened by the Rudd and Gillard Governments at great cost to the nation between 2008  and 2013. 

  The savings include: 

  • closures of Phosphate Hill and Construction Camp on Christmas Island, Bladin APOD in  Darwin and fewer numbers at remaining centres realising net savings of $326 million  over the coming years;  • reductions to the use of charter flight transfers between the various detention centres 

  providing savings of $66 million; and  • logistics and service requirement savings across the detention network which will add a  further $112 million. 

  These savings are in addition to the 10 detention facility closures in 2014 and other changes to  the management of the onshore detention network which generated savings of $283.3 million  realised in last year's budget. 

  Mr Dutton said that in its 20 months of operation OSB had delivered results that many thought  were unattainable. 

  "The facts are clear- our borders are stronger, countless lives have been saved and our costs  are down. 

  "The two most important outcomes in all of this are that there have been no known deaths at  sea since we started turning back the boats and without the flood of I MAs we are once again  able to reach out through our Refugee and Humanitarian Programme to those most in need  around the world and bring them to Australia through an orderly, compassionate and planned  way," Mr Dutton said. 

  Further information: John Wiseman or Merryn Royle- 02 6277 7860 

