---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Armadale, WA: 12 September 2015: save our weekends rally for penalty rates; Canning by-election; Peter Dutton laughing at climate change; Syrian refugee crisis"
date: "2015-09-12"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "save our weekends rally for penalty rates"
  - "Canning by-election"
  - "Peter Dutton laughing at climate change"
  - "Syrian refugee crisis"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/215914378
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4074621%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  ARMADALE   SATURDAY, 12 SEPTEMBER 2015   

 SUBJECT/S: Save our weekends rally for penalty rates; Canning by-election;  Peter Dutton laughing at climate change; Syrian refugee crisis 

 MATT KEOGH, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR CANNING: Good morning everyone. It's  been great to be down here in Armadale today with the community rally in support of  penalty rates. Penalty rates are vitally important to protect the living standards of so  many low paid Australians, that of course support our entire economy. No one’s  going to have a growing economy if Mr Abbott cuts penalty rates.  

 So it's been great to be down here with the community in support of penalty rates  and I just want to say this: Mr Hastie can't distance himself from what Mr Abbott is  putting out there about trying to cut back and claw back penalty rates. A vote for Mr  Hastie, Mr Abbott's candidate in this election, is going to be a vote for cutting penalty  rates and it's going to be a vote for broken promises. I'll hand over now to Bill  Shorten. 

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Matt and it's great to be  back in Armadale yet again for my 5th or 6th day in the Canning by-election. Today  we see members of the community, many people who go to work and don't earn a lot  of money just saying enough is enough Mr Abbott and the Liberals, please stop  attacking our penalty rates. The future of Australia doesn't depend upon cutting the  wages and conditions of millions of Australians. We can have a bright future in this  country if we properly fund our schools and our health care, if we stand up for new  jobs and infrastructure, and most importantly if we don't divide the country. Retail  wages in this country are not high, hospitality and tourism rates are not high. Many of  the people who depend upon penalty rates be they nurses, ambulance officers,  people who look after our quality of life, they need these penalty rates. It is long  overdue for Mr Abbott and his Liberals to stop this attack on penalty rates in  Australia and just remember the customers in the high street, the taxpayers of this  nation, the parents of the next generation of Australians going to school, they all  need penalty rates. It just doesn't make sense for Mr Abbott to keep trying to say that  the only future this country has got is a race to the bottom on wages and conditions. 

 The future for Australia is in high skilled, reasonably paid jobs where we're all  working together. It's just the sensible direction. Happy to take any questions.  

 JOURNALIST: So you believe strong Labor result in this by-election - win it or  reduce the margin? You believe (inaudible). 

 SHORTEN: Well we've already seen the latest outbreak of the Liberal hunger games  start. We see the undermining of Mr Abbott and Mr Abbott threatening to get rid of  some of his Ministers. The really shameful thing about what's happening in Australia  at the moment is that unemployment is up, wages are down, growth isn't where it  should be. What we need is more confidence so that we can see people making  decisions to spend money and get ahead. But the only thing that's really happening  in Australia at the moment is that Mr Abbott and his Liberals are all having a fight  over Mr Abbott's job. You know, I stand here today in Canning the leader of a united  Labor Party. We're working together, but the problem is that Mr Abbott today will be  praying that Matt Keogh doesn't get elected in Canning because that's the only way I  suspect he'll stay leader of the Liberal Party. The real problem is that Mr Abbott's  own troops are already lining up against him and the election in Canning isn't even  over and they're already starting to size up Mr Abbott's job. It's just not good enough,  Australia deserves better than infighting amongst the Liberal Party.  

 JOURNALIST: You mentioned in your response that the electorates around the  country would be jealous of the (inaudible) that the Canning voters  will be for next  week and is that what you will be focusing on. That message to Canning voters?  

 SHORTEN:  It's a big bigger than that although that is definitely part of what is  happening next Saturday. We're very lucky that Matt Keogh's chosen to be Labor's  local representative in the Canning by-election. He's successfully convinced myself  and other Labor people that we need to do a lot more on community safety and  tackle the scourge of ice. In this campaign as well, he successfully argued along with  his colleagues for us to spend $180 million on legitimate road and public transport  projects which will see jobs created and the communities in Canning, south of Perth  to be liveable communities where people can raise a family. And he's also argued  strongly against cuts to the schools and hospitals which Mr Abbott's been carried  out. So that's Matt Keogh, he's a local champion already and he's already changing  the face of national politics through his advocacy. But it is true that the unspoken  person in the Canning by-election, the person whose photo won't be on any the  Liberal how-to-vote cards, Mr Abbott, it really is a lot about him and his Liberal team  in Canberra. I cannot believe frankly that we've seen this outbreak of undermining of  Mr Abbott and all the carry on in Canberra. They're just interested in their own jobs,  they're not focused on the jobs of West Australians, whereas Matt Keogh and Labor -  we're united, we understand how real people organise their lives. That's what we're  about. We're for penalty rates, we're for better funded schools, we're not for cutting  pensions, we're for tackling unemployment and for infrastructure projects so that a lot  of the people who haven't got work now the mining boom has eased, that they can  get another job.  

 JOURNALIST: Will you be here this Saturday, on the day of the by-election? 

 SHORTEN: I don't know if I'll be here on the Saturday but I'll be back here again in  Canning before the election is concluded.  

 JOURNALIST: That would have been 5 times during the campaign? It shows you  the importance of the by-election though doesn't it. I mean you would have been  here 4 times today, Tony Abbott's on his in way today so that's going to be 3 for him.  It shows you how important this election is, it is far bigger than Canning isn't it? 

 SHORTEN: Well I think you'll find my trips are of slightly longer duration than Mr  Abbott's and I think I do less staged events and more just talking to real people  because that's how you find out what's going on in the nation. I think the real issue  though as you say is that there's a local set of issues around community safety,  around the cuts that Mr Abbott and his Liberal team and of course jobs. But there is  a bigger picture too. The people in Canning can send a message to Mr Abbott and  his Liberal team that they don't like the way Australia's going. Western Australia is  not the same state it was 2 years ago before Mr Abbott got elected. The mining  boom's eased unemployment - there's an extra 30,000 West Australians  unemployed. We've got too many young people unemployed, that's up, real wages  growth has slumped, there's a real crisis of confidence in the high street which  affects small business. We need a government in Canberra who's got a plan. Labor  has a jobs and infrastructure plan. We're going to oppose $100,000 university  degrees and make sure that young people get a chance to go to uni. We'll restore  funding in TAFE and we'll make sure that our health care system's properly funded. I  and Matt Keogh and Labor believe that the quality of health care you should get in  Canning or anywhere else in Australia should depend upon your Medicare card not  your credit card. So yes, there are big national issues. I don't think there's been a by-election like this in 50 years which could influence the fate of who the Prime Minster  of Australia is.  

 JOURNALIST: Should the Prime Minister apologise over Peter Dutton's comments  yesterday? 

 SHORTEN: Absolutely. You know, when you go and replay that amazing footage of  the semi-public remarks made by Mr Dutton and smirking laughter of Mr Abbott, it  really is astounding. See what I think is that Mr Dutton is somebody who would say  these things; it's just that he's somebody who doesn't get caught saying them until  yesterday. What I also think, is that Mr Abbott needs to make a choice. See I think  it's unacceptable that Mr Dutton, he's a Minister, he's a Cabinet Minister, he's not  some bloke in the outer at the footy, he's a Cabinet Minister of the Australian  Government. We depend upon his skills to present Australia in the right light. The  fact that we have a minister and a prime minister who thinks climate change is a joke  shows that we don't have leaders in this country at the moment, in the Government.  So I think Mr Dutton, it's not good enough that he says it was a private conversation,  now that really isn't good enough. Mr Dutton has to say he's been caught - does he  actually think these things? Is he sorry? Was he jet lagged? Did he speak in haste?  Mr Dutton it is not good enough for you to say no I’ve got nothing further to say. But I  think unfortunately because Mr Dutton hasn't apologised over the last 24 hours it's  now become an issue of the captain as well, Mr Abbott. Mr Abbott needs to make  clear whose side he's on. Does he support Peter Dutton, does he really think it's  okay, and that climate change is a joke, talking about “Cape York time” is a joke? Or  does he actually think that he's on the side of the Australian people - see Mr Abbott  now has to make a choice - are those sort of views the views you want of Cabinet  Ministers in this country ? Does he chose Mr Dutton or does he choose the  Australian people. You can't choose both. Final question thanks. 

 JOURNALIST: A women who was reportedly on the same boat as the Syrian boy  who was found washed up on the Turkish beach claims that his father is a people  smuggler. What's your reaction to that? 

 SHORTEN: I've read some of those comments in the media this morning. I can't add  any more than what's already been there. What I do know is it's a tragedy. What I do  know is this person's child drowned at sea. I think the whole thing is a complete  tragedy. To me I’m not going to get into the blame game of a particular boat, what I  believe is that Labor did the right thing on Monday this week by calling for a  significant increase in refugees, and I congratulate the Government for backing that  in and indeed picking the number of 12,000. I do also think though that it's important  that we provide support to the United Nations High Commission for Refugees  because of course money spent there in those first line neighbouring nations will  help relieve the pressure internationally. So I think the drowning is a complete  tragedy, I think what Australian leaders can do is show leadership and I think that  has happened this week. Thanks everyone.  

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT 02 6277 4053   

