---
title: "Labor needs to get on board with Coalition's jobs plan for young people"
date: "2015-06-11"
creators:
  - "Hartsuyker, Luke"
source: "ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211902091
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3887768%22
---

 

 THE HON LUKE HARTSUYKER MP  Assistant Minister for Employment  Federal Member for Cowper    

 11 June 2015 

 

 LABOR NEEDS TO GET ON BOARD WITH COALITION’S JOBS  PLAN FOR YOUNG PEOPLE    

 Today Labor’s Shadow Employment Minister Brendan O’Connor has demonstrated once  again Labor’s complete failure on the issue of youth unemployment.    

 In his budget reply speech Bill Shorten did not mention the issue of youth unemployment  at all and to date Labor has only committed a paltry $21 million towards tackling the  issue.    

 “By comparison, the Coalition is leading by example and has committed 15 times more  money to help 15 times more people,” Mr Hartsuyker said.    

 “Our $330 million Youth Employment Strategy is a jobs plan directly targeted at helping  young people who are most at risk of long term unemployment through transition to work  and intensive support programmes.    

 “It also provides targeted support to vulnerable and at risk groups like people with mental  illness and refugees.    

 “But Labor need to stop being part of the problem and start being part of the solution.    

 “They need to get on board and support the Coalition’s $330 million Youth Employment  Strategy which is improving job opportunities for young people.    

 “Unfortunately, Labor and their puppet masters in the ACTU are attacking key parts of  the Coalition’s plan to help young people into the workforce.    

 “The Labor and the ACTU are attacking Work for the Dole and our new National Work  Experience Programme initiative despite their proven success in giving people on  welfare real job experience that leads to paid work.    

 “The Coalition has a real plan to help young people into jobs. Labor need to stop  standing in the way of young people who want a job and get behind the Coalition’s jobs  plan for young people,” Mr Hartsuyker said.    

 Media Contact:  Isaac Jeffrey - 0409 083 153   

