---
title: "Transcript of joint press conference: Parliament House, Canberra: 7 September 2015: two years of Tony Abbott; Syrian refugee crisis"
date: "2015-09-07"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
  - "two years of Tony Abbott"
  - "Syrian refugee crisis"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/215658290
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4062601%22
---

 

 THE HON BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS   

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  MEMBER FOR CORIO   

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  MONDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER 2015   

 SUBJECT/S: Two years of Tony Abbott; Syrian refugee crisis.   

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good afternoon everyone. Two  years ago Tony Abbott was elected Prime Minister. Two years ago, Mr Abbott  promised Australians that we will not let you down. But in the last two years,  unemployment has now risen to 6.3 per cent, there are 800,000 Australians  unemployed. There are over a million Australians who are underemployed, there is  another 800,000 Australians stranded on the Disability Support Pension. Economic  growth is wallowing in mediocrity and confidence is down. Mr Abbott, however,  seems focused on infighting - he is more focused on keeping his day job than doing  his day job. Australia deserves better after two years of Mr Abbott's Government.    

 Today also Labor wants to talk about the global humanitarian crisis that  is unfolding. I talk, of course, of the Syrian refugee crisis. Mr Abbott's announcement  yesterday was simply not good enough. Today Labor is calling for an emergency  bipartisan meeting, of not just the Government and the Opposition, but of  State leaders, of community representatives, of  religious organisations. Furthermore, Labor is calling today for a one-off increase in  our humanitarian intake of refugees from 13,750, for an additional 10,000 refugees  caught up in a conflict not of their making, and indeed they are part of the greatest 

 peacetime refugee crisis that the world has seen since the conclusion of the Second  World War.    

 Labor believes it isn't good enough for the Government or Mr Abbott to simply say  that they will take more refugees, but from within the existing level of refugees  scheduled to be taken by this country. We are proposing a significant increase  because this is a significant crisis. I would like now to invite my Deputy Leader,  Shadow Foreign Minister Tanya Plibersek to talk further about what Labor  believes should be done, then I invite the Shadow Immigration spokesperson  Richard Marles to supplement that.   

 TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks  very much, Bill. Richard will speak in a moment about the proposal that we will make  on bringing more refugees to Australia from this conflict zone. I want to speak very  briefly about the humanitarian assistance we should offer to the people who continue  to be affected by this conflict in Syria and in neighbouring countries. At the beginning  of last year, I visited both Lebanon and Jordan to see the conditions in the refugee  camps in those countries. Of course, the situation in Syria is horrific. It was horrific  then and it is horrific now.    

 Of a population around the size of Australia - you can just picture - about half the  population is either internally displaced or has fled to neighbouring countries. There  are about 3.5 million people at last count in neighbouring countries, including, say,  using Lebanon as an example - a country of just over 4 million people, has about a  million refugees that they are looking after. Jordan is in a similar situation. Turkey  has even a higher number again. So, we are saying today, given the immense  humanitarian need in Syria and in neighbouring countries, that the Australian  Government should do more. It should offer $100 million to help in Syria and in the  region.     $100 million would buy, for example, rehabilitated schools and classrooms for almost  a million children, and food relief for around 100,000, and vaccinations for almost  1.5 million children, and 20,000 families provided with housing, and 50,000 women  and girls provided with support for gender-based violence. The scale of need is  absolutely enormous and sadly Australia has actually been doing less as the crisis  has worsened. When Labor was in Government, we provided $100 million to the  Syrian crisis. Since then, the Abbott Government has provided about $55  million. This contrasts, of course, with around $650 million which will be spent over  two years on providing military support -military support that Labor has supported -  to help protect civilians in Iraq from the threat of Daesh. I'm going to pass onto  Richard now who will speak a little bit about the additional measures we  are proposing for asylum seekers.   

 RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINSTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION:  Thank you, Tanya and thank you, Bill. As has been said, we are  experiencing in the world today the largest humanitarian need since the Second  World War. The UNHCR tells us 59 million people in the world are displaced and  the single biggest cause of that is the conflict in Syria. All of us have been moved in  recent days by the images of Aylan Kurdi and what has played out in Hungary and  across Europe, but of course this issue now has been around for some time. As  Tanya said, both she and I have visited Syrian refugee camps in Jordan and have  seen first-hand the impact of the Syrian crisis. 10,000 additional places is a 

 very significant offer. And it does have a real cost, we don't underestimate that, but  in recent days we've seen the states come out and make offers of assistance in  relation to meeting the needs of this. In recent days, we've seen members of the  community, the Syrian community here in Australia, saying that they are willing  to help. And through working with the states, through community sponsored visas  which reduce cost, through family reunion, through providing people work rights who  come here, we do believe that as a country we can work together and put 10,000  places on the table. But to do that, our Prime Minister needs to show some  leadership and bring people around that table. On the conservative side of politics it  shouldn't be left up to the New South Wales Premier to lead this debate. Our Prime  Minister ought to be bringing people together now and putting that table together, so  that we can, as a country, offer 10,000 places. That would make us commensurate  with the kind of offers which are being expressed by the countries of Europe. That  would be an amount which is suitable and fitting to a country of our size and our  generosity, and befitting obviously the sentiment which is out there today from the  Australian people for there to be action. Tony Abbott needs to seize this moment  and demonstrate some leadership.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Marles, do you have a costing on this policy?   

 MARLES: This is a real cost. And there is no getting around that issue, but we are  talking about a one-off emergency increase in our humanitarian intake, and so in that  sense the costs that we are describing is defrayed over a number of years, but I  also make the point that we've got states right now costing contributions that they  would make to this. If we did talk about this on the basis of cost-sharing with  states, community-based sponsored visas, family reunion and work rights, all of that  can defray the cost and we are a big enough country to put this proposition  together. We don't underestimate the significance of it, but it can be done.   

 JOURNALIST: Can I just confirm, are you talking about 10,000 additional  permanent refugee places right now?   

 MARLES: Yes.   

 JOURNALIST: And what are the community sponsored ones that you are talking  about?   

 MARLES: Well, within the humanitarian program now, which was introduced under  the Labor Government, there are community sponsored based visas, that is to say  members of the community provide money in relation to that particular visa, which  enables communities to bring people out under the humanitarian program. That  was a reform that we put in place when we were in government. Obviously visas of  that kind are much cheaper in terms of the public purse. It’s the community then  playing its part in bringing people to Australia. So with the community playing its part,  with the states playing its part, with families playing their part, we can all do  this together, and of course if work rights were provided to these people and that  was not the case with the Kosovars under John Howard, but if work rights were  provided to this cohort, then they play their part as well in being here in Australia. We  think if you do all of that together, if the Prime Minister was to show some leadership  and get that discussion going, then as a country, we can put 10,000 places out there  and that would be a very good thing for this country to do. 

 

 JOURNALIST: The 10,000 would that be this financial year or spread over  three? And secondly, for those of us who remember, with the Kosovars there was an  expectation that some of them go home, I think it’s going to be much more difficult in  this instance, are you, this would be permanent settlement would it, just to confirm?    

 MARLES: Yes, correct. So let me deal with that question first, Andrew. We’re  not talking about safe haven visas which was the visa class that was used for the  Kosovars. The reality in relation to the Kosovars was that most of those people  ultimately did stay in Australia, and so offering permanent places better reflects the  reality of the situation that we’re talking about and indeed were you to do this through  the permanent humanitarian program, it could be done far more efficiently so  ultimately that helps defray costs as well. We would be trying to do this within the  course of the financial year. But in saying that, there is a practicality limit here and  that is the ability of the settlement community to be able to absorb those people  within our program. Now we've had some conversations initially with the settlement  community today. What we understand is that there is the capacity to be able to do  that at relatively short notice and the reality here is that the journey from Java to  Christmas Island, having been ended, we hope, does free up capacity within  the system to take people. So, we do believe that it can be done within a year, but  with that practicality limit, that is the intention of this proposition.   

 JOURNALIST: Is there any room within Labor policy, to accept those safe  heaven visas, with the reintroduction of those Kosovo style [inaudible]?     

 MARLES: That visa class as I understand it is still on the books, and there may well  be a situation in the future where you might use a visa class of that kind, but in  relation to this circumstance the proposition that we are putting forward  are permanent places. That is going to reflect the reality of what we're actually  talking about and the sooner that you get people in Australia settled, the sooner  people are out there working, the sooner people are off the public purse tab,  the cheaper the whole proposition is. It’s actually going to be much more cost  effective to do it this way and to have people here under the permanent program  than to use the safe haven visa category for this circumstance.   

 JOURNALIST: [Inaudible] have skills and qualifications and [inaudible] there’s  any scope to increase the number of migrants coming through the skilled migration  program which is obviously a lot larger from some of these people?   

 MARLES: Well, look, the observation that many refugees who come to this country  have skills is absolutely right. And often the skills that people have, coming through  the humanitarian program, are used to the great benefit of our country. What we're  talking about now, though, is a humanitarian response. The humanitarian  visa program is the way in which we should be responding. We don't want to do this  on the basis of what skills people have in terms of their accessing this, because at  the end of the day this is meeting a humanitarian need, and that's the way in which  we ought to be going about this.   

 JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister has raised repeatedly the question of bringing  minority groups - he specified minority groups - is there a particular reason why you  should or shouldn't do that? And second if I could also just ask about this idea of 

 safe heavens within Syria, whether Labor has thought about that and what  the implications of that are?   

 MARLES: Well, in terms of, Laura, which minorities come or who comes, that's  ultimately a question that we think should be worked through with the UNHCR. They  are the people on the ground who have the best sense of where the greatest need is  and what would make sense here is for the Government to, if we were in a position  to offer 10,000 places, to provide them to the UNHCR in order for those places to be  deployed by the UNHCR to the greatest possible effect. Now the one caveat on that  is that if we’re talking about community-sponsored visas in Australia, if we’re talking  about family re-unification, and both of those visa categories we mention in this  context because they are cheaper, to be frank, then obviously that has a relationship  with what communities exist here in Australia, but with that caveat, principally you  would be asking the UNHCR to deploy these to the best possible effect.   

 PLIBERSEK: Can I just answer the question about safe havens? It’s obvious that  with more than 11 million people displaced within and outside Syria that there will be  no final resolution to this Syrian exodus until there is a political solution in  Syria itself. There have been some minor good signs in recent times that the  countries that are most involved in this conflict are talking about what a political  resolution of the conflict might look like. Russia, Iran, the United States, Turkey, all of  these countries seem to be inching very slowly towards talking about a post-Assad Syria. That gives us, I think, greater capacity to talk about safe havens. Safe  havens, of course, will not just be safe havens from Daesh or IS, and the many other  groups on the ground - over 1,000 by one estimate - that are fighting their way  through Syria, but they will also have to be safe havens from the  Assad regime. There have been continual reports of the Assad regime bombing  civilians - very large civilian casualties - and using weapons like barrel bombs that  are doing very significant damage. So, yes, it would be good to see safe  havens established. That will have to be part of a broader political solution and they  will have to be safe not just from one terrorist group, but from the range of non-state  actors and indeed from the Assad regime as well.   

 JOURNALIST: [Inaudible] airstrikes in Syria [inaudible]   

 SHORTEN: Labor’s considering its position on that. We recognise the  argument which has been put which is Australian aeroplanes bombing Daesh who  cross into the border from Syria into Iraq and then pursuing them back into Syria is  allowed under international law in terms of the principle of collective self-defence. Labor hasn't finalised its position on that today.    

 But today what Labor has said is that we've decided that Australia should play its  role in the international effort to relieve the pressure on the neighbouring countries  around Syria for the massive refugee crisis. That Europe is proposing to take  120,000 refugees shows, I think, it's important that Australia does its bit. Back in  1976 and '77, Malcolm Fraser stood up in terms of the tragedy of the exodus from  Vietnam. Bob Hawke of course did the right thing by Chinese students studying here  following the Tiananmen Square massacre, John Howard, too, when dealing with  the plight of Kosovars made a decision to go above and beyond. It is now time for  this Parliament and for Mr Abbott to step up and what we've said today, Labor  believes that it is time for Australia to dig a little deeper, to be a decent and 

 compassionate nation that we know we are, and to provide an extra 10,000 refugees  with a better prospect of life than they are currently experiencing.    

 See you all in Question Time, thank you.   

 ENDS 

 

