---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 24 September 2015: Labor's plan for a smarter, more prosperous Australia; Labor's plan for startups and innovation; domestic violence; asylum seeker policy; China FTA"
date: "2015-09-24"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Labor's plan for a smarter, more prosperous Australia"
  - "Labor's plan for startups and innovation"
  - "domestic violence"
  - "asylum seeker policy"
  - "China FTA"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/216355682
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4096115%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  SYDNEY  THURSDAY, 24 SEPTEMBER 2015   

 SUBJECT/S: Labor’s plan for a smarter, more prosperous Australia; Labor’s  plan for Startups and innovation; Domestic Violence; Asylum seeker policy;  China FTA.   

 ED HUSIC, SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY TO THE SHADOW  TREASURER: Thanks everyone for joining us today for what we believe is a crucial  announcement about where to next for the Australian economy, and where to next in  terms of improving the lives of people across Australia, and Bill will be announcing  today a series of measures that we believe will help provide a more supportive  environment for startups in this country. We know, we have known within the Labor  party for some time, that innovation is basically a very important mechanism for  retooling, regearing the economy, particularly at a time when people are wondering  where to next with mining and manufacturing going through change. We need to  think about the massive changes ahead in the world of work, and we need to be  prepared for that now. This is a long term vision, a national long term vision requires  a long term plan and forward thinking. So we’ll be announcing a number of things  that address some of the areas that we believe need to be tackled if we want to  supercharge our startup environment and give us pride of place on the world stage  as an innovation nation. So I’d like to invite Bill Shorten to outline our views as to  where to next in this second wave of reforms to help startups in Australia.   

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everyone,  fantastic to be here.  And I’d just like to thank Jason Clare, Chris Bowen and Ed  Husic for the work they’ve done on the announcements Labor will be making today.  The Labor Party fundamentally gets that Australian politics needs good policies for  the future of this country. At the core of good policies for a bright future for Australia  is how we become an innovation and education economy. Labor's really committed  to making sure that Australians can have good, rewarding work in the future. That is  why in my Budget Reply, I outlined the first stage of Labor's policies to capture the  wave of digital change that is washing through the whole world.    

 At Budget Reply, I said we needed to make sure our education system is up to  scratch. We proposed that Australian children at school should be able to learn  coding, but when they go to university there will  be 100,000 HECS debt-free places 

 for students who enrol in science, technology, engineering and mathematics. At the  same time, we've recommitted to properly funding TAFE and to opposing the  deregulation [agenda] of the Government of universities, which means that there will  be downward pressure on the price of going to university. So all of these measures,  plus supporting funding for startups, means that we have outlined until today, how  we can help set up the workforce for the future in technology. But more work needs  to be done.    

 That is why today, Labor is addressing the challenges that we need another 100,000  workers in ICT industries in the next six years. Labor doesn't accept the status quo  that Australian business in terms of collaboration with universities is only 32nd in the  world when it comes to small and medium enterprises working with universities, and  indeed 33rd in the world when it comes to big business working with universities. We  need to see a lot closer relationships between universities and business and most  importantly we want to see more young people encouraged to back their ideas. This  is where our policies today on startups come in.    

 If we do startups properly in this country it's estimated that within the next two  decades there could be over half a million jobs created by startup businesses. So  today Labor is making the following announcement: one, we want to support 2,000  students every year, final year students, graduates, instead of automatically racing  off into the work force, to be given an honours year but not in the old way which this  was considered. We are proposing that 2,000 of our brightest, most enterprising  young people, will work with university accelerator hubs, comparable to the  institutions we are in today. And what we see is young people for a year will receive  business training, mentorship but most importantly they've spent three years at  university or four years, they have got a good idea. We want to give them for an  extra year the chance to back in their own ingenuity, and the way we will do it is  provide income contingent loans to them so young people have the financial security  to be able to back in their great new idea.    

 In addition to 2,000 graduate income contingent loans for startup ideas in the year  after they finish university, we're also proposing there would be 2,000  entrepreneurship visas. This means if there's bright people around the world who  might be working out do they come to Australia or another country to start an idea,  we are going to open the doors so that the 2000 of the brightest people in the world  can have a chance to have a visa in Australia, where they can back in their ideas,  where they have capital funding for it and we will be better off if we can win the  competition for the brains race that is on. In addition to that we are proposing 2,000  graduate entrepreneurship visas. We take a lot of international students in Australia.  But quite often when they finish their degree they head back to their home country.  Having gone to the effort of helping educate these bright people we want to  encourage some of them to stay in Australia and back in their ideas. We would  create a one year visa capable of being extended depending on their idea. Where  2,000 students have a good idea, educated in an Australian institution, we  encourage them to stay here and back their idea further.    

 These are some of Labor's ideas in our second wave of reforms to capture the jobs  of the future. We have set up the case for properly teaching STEM subjects in  schools . We will provide 100,000 spots for STEM students to go to university, as  well as 25,000 teaching scholarships for science and maths teachers to go back into  the education system so teach others what they know as well as upskilling existing 

 teachers we have proposed all of that. We have proposed proper financing half a  billion dollar startup investment fund for clever ideas in this area.  And now what we  are proposing on top of our commitment to properly funding universities in Australia  and put downward pressure on university fees is a series of innovative measures  which will ensure that the best and the brightest in the world will be incentivised to  come to Australia.  Some of the best and the brightest in the world who are currently  educating in Australia might choose to back in their ideas here and very importantly,  we nurture our home grown talent and give the bright kids who finish their degree to  back in their ideas for another year at university, collaborating with industry and  business knowledge.    

 And behind all of that we're also proposing that we need to open up our government,  it makes itself accessible to new technology. We are proposing there should be more  generally publicly available data that government has and greater access to this data  so that we can start opening up the information government has and have other  people work with this information. We want to adopt a particularly innovative idea  from the United States called Challenge.gov where we provide challenge platforms.  Labor understands that quite often the best ideas an organisation may need are not  immediately within that organisation so we will set up challenge platforms and invite  the whole community, bright people to look at the challenges Government has.    

 Now this is quite a detailed plan and we will have more to say in coming weeks and  months about taxation, about a platform for investment and engagement in our  region. What Labor is doing today is we recognise the digital age is upon us, we  recognise it is not enough for government and politicians to remark about the  existence of change. What would we do about? It we get that the digital economy is  changing the way Australians are educated. The way we communicate. The way we  work, the way we relate to each other. What we want to do is make sure that  Australia benefits from the global competition for jobs, by making sure that  Australians have the best possible skills going forward, that they have the best  possible chances to innovate and backing their own ideas and that we become a  startup nation. I believe that Australia is capable of being in the top 10 per cent of  global nations when it comes to startups, provided we have the right policies. Now  what I'd like to do is ask some of my Shadow Ministers to talk further in detail about  what we are talking about today.   

 CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Thanks very much, Bill. The fact of the  matter is that the majority of jobs that will be created in Australia over the next 10  years will be in firms which do not today exist. What we are doing today, what Bill  has announced, is Labor's next stage. Plans to make sure the environment intis  exists for those firms to emerge and grow and create great jobs for Australians. The  fact of the matter is that the technological revolution is occurring, Australia does  haven't a choice about that. But we do have a choice where we're at the cutting edge  of it or the victims of it. That is the choice Australia has, it's one of the most important  economic opportunities Australia has before it. What we are announcing today is the  next stage in Labor's plans. Bill made a series of very important announcements in  his Budget Reply back in May and today we are announcing the next stage. And as  Bill said there will be more to come. This is the culmination of months of work on  behalf of Labor's team. I know that innovation and entrepreneurialism is the favour of  the fortnight night but this is the culmination of consultation with startups, with  universities, both in Australia and overseas. What we are implementing today in  many regards represents world's best practice, the entrepreneur's visa, it exists in 

 other countries. We looked at how it works in the United Kingdom and other  countries and we have adopted the best part of the schemes around the world and  the scheme to enable young university students who have ideas to stay on and try to  turn those ideas into reality comes from consultation, not only with universities but  with startups themselves. This is the result of considerable amount of work. These  ideas will form the basis of the approach of a Shorten Labor Government. But if the  Government chooses to embrace them in the meantime they will do so with our full  bipartisan support and likewise if they have other ideas if they're good ideas we will  also back them because this is too important for Australia's future. I just want to  emphasise just how much this will be defining feature of the next Labor Government,  the belief in entrepreneurialism, in taking risk, in getting out and starting up new  businesses. There are announcements that Bill has made and we have flagged in  the past the entrepreneur’s visa and today we are announcing how it would work in  more detail. I would come with the full focus of Bill as PM, myself as Treasurer,  Jason as Communications Minister, Ed, Kim the whole Labor cabinet and team.  Focussed on creating the jobs of the future because the opportunities so important.   

 JASON CLARE, SHADOW COMMUNICATIONS MINISTER: Thanks Bill and Chris.  The important point I want to make here is this is not a boutique debate. This is the  main game. For too long in Australia the big economic debates have been focused  tax or spending or industrial relations at the expense of this issue, the digital  transformation of our economy. This has been left on the sidelines, it can't be left  there anymore. 40 per cent of the jobs that Australians do today will be replaced by  computers in the next 10 to 15 years. And more jobs will be created, new jobs will be  created but they will require different skills and we need to make sure that  Australians have the skills to do those jobs. As Chris said just then, most of the jobs  that will be created in the next decade and beyond are by companies that don't exist  today, by startups and we need to build as many great startups in Australia as we  can. We have met some today and we need more of them. To give you an example  of the potential of startups to grow exponentially have a look at five American  companies on the West Coast of the United States that, together, have a combined  market cap of almost the size of the Australian Stock Exchange. Google, Facebook,  Twitter, Amazon and Uber, together almost the size of the Australian Stock  Exchange. That is why we need to focus here, this is where the jobs of the future  are. And from the work we are doing the key take-outs from people working in the  sector in start-ups and in venture capital are we don't have the skills we need and we  don't have the money to invest and target investments in the startup community.  That is why we have said to make sure we have the skills we need to for the future,  we need coding starting in primary school. We need to teach teachers the skills to  teach our students STEM subjects and we need to make sure we have the home-grown talent we need and that is why we have a startup year at university and also  bring in talented people from overseas and keep students who come to Australia and  study here, here in Australia starting up new businesses. On top of that we need to  make sure we have money invested in good ideas. So Bill announced six months  ago a co-investment fund, a half a billion dollar co-investment fund, investing with  venture capital in great startup ideas and on top of that today we are announcing we  want to work with Australian superannuation funds and look at ways to provide  incentives to work with them for Australian venture capital companies to invest in  Australian startups. We need more skills and more money and that is what we are  focused on, working with the start-up community. I want to thank all the people in the  startup community who have helped us to come up with this plan, this is stage two  and there's much more to come.  

 

 HUSIC: Can I make one final point before we move to questions. This place, Tank  Stream Labs, and other places like it are about disruption an we're about disruption  too. We are prepared to disrupt the usual way in which politics is usually done, and  what we’re saying to the Government is that if these ideas are things that the  Government believes they can work with us on, we are happy to work with them on it  because innovation doesn't wait for elections. The national mission now is for us to  become more innovative, to grow the economy and to generate new jobs and we  think that work can start right now. It doesn't wait for a Federal election to happen,  and we are certainly willing to work with Malcolm Turnbull if he is willing to work with  us.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten are you pleased with Malcolm Turnbull’s domestic  violence announcement?   

 SHORTEN: I am but are there any questions about the technology that I would love  to talk about today?   

 JOURNALIST: How much is it going to cost and how will you fund it?   

 SHORTEN: Two answers and then I will ask Chris to expand further. We cannot  afford not to be in the game of innovation, technology and better chances for our  young people. We have articulated across all our policies that we want more kids to  feel they can go to university, more mature age students to feel they can change  occupation. We want to encourage more women, more people from the regions to  have the opportunity to get into STEM. I believe the current situation is a dire  indictment of where we're at. The truth of the matter is, say, for instance, New  Zealand - they are providing when you have a look at the startups they're doing  something like 20 per cent of their turnout as a collaboration between companies  and universities; we are at 4 per cent. If you look at the graduations of Australians  finished with STEM degrees; 16 per cent of graduates in Australia finish with STEM  qualifications, it's something like 51 or 52 per cent in Singapore and 45 per cent in  China. So the first point I make to you in term of cost and price is let's start doing  politics and the reporting of politics differently. Let's look at the value we're creating  and where we need to be not just the price of it. But coming to the important point  you make about price, our policies today are $16 or $17 million. That is what is really  good about what we are proposing today. The idea that we would get 2,000 kids who  are at uni, the second sort of big dot com startup inventor might right now be  studying at one of our universities. This man or woman, they’ve done three years of  study, they’ve got an idea which they think is an idea which might change the way  our society is organised, might change the way commerce is conducted. What we  are proposing today is that for 2,000 of these kids who’ve got drive and  entrepreneurship - and they don’t have to be young people either - but for when  they finish their study, a year, when we back in the innate capacity of people, when  you look at the price of it compared to what we are potentially develop, this is a great  deal.    

 The same with the visas we’re proposing. We need to be in the global competition  for the smartest minds on the planet. There's lot of good reasons to come and live in  Australia. We have a great lifestyle, a great quality of life. We’ve got a great  commitment to fairness and egalitarianism.  This is a very good society. What we  need to do is attract people to it. As my team have been talking about, we have been 

 looking at what's best practice in the world. It is a very small cost to offer 2,000  entrepreneur visas to people who would bring some capital and also back in their  ideas. It is a very small cost to help say to international students we would like you to  stay here for a year and back in your idea. So when you look at it from improving the  quality of our teachers, from more kids going to university to upskilling existing  teachers and through making sure more kids are in love with the STEM-related  subjects, making sure they’re prepared for the jobs of the future.  From providing a  venture capital assistance fund that will actually have an exponential multiplier effect  on capital accumulation through unlocking the flow of capital from superannuation  funds into technology and startups in this country, right through to opening up  government. Right through to having challenge platforms where for a very small cost  -  we are saying $5 million - we can engage the whole Australian community in what  the challenges of government are. So I appreciate your question because it really  does go to the point that there is a lot more value to be created here if we're  imaginative, if we’re bold and willing to back in the best and the brightest.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten the latest Morgan poll shows 61 per cent of voters aged  18 to 24 actually [inaudible] Labor. Would you say this is a plan to appeal to that  demographic and sure up their support?   

 SHORTEN: I did say go back to domestic violence, so I will quickly deal with this  question. Labor gets how young people are organised in this society. One big  difference between the Liberal Party of Australia and Labor is we don't look at young  people and say you have to pay more for everything. When we look at the costs of  young people in Australia, they go to work, they have to compulsorily save some  income to support their retirement in forty years’ time, we support that but that  means foregone income right now. Young people have to pay their HECS debt and  then what the Liberal Party's approach to young people is they see a cash register.  They want young people to pay more in GST. They want them to pay more in going  to university. And our strategy today about technology and startup is not about votes,  frankly. We are happy if Malcolm Turnbull takes our whole platform because we think  that innovation shouldn't wait for an election. This nation is too important to worry  about. That we are entering in the competition of ideas. I am pleased if young people  are responding well to our ideas, not to mention our consistency on climate change.  But for us it's all about making sure that young people and their parents know: we're  backing bright kids, it doesn't matter where you come from but you will get the same  chances in life. It's not based often how rich your parents are and we will make sure  we give the best start in life for jobs of the future. As a lot of young people are now  leaving university and there will be jobs they will be doing in the next 10 years that  currently don't exist now. We must give them the best skills so they can fulfil their  own potential.    

 In terms of domestic violence I am really pleased that the Liberal Government is  taking up this issue. To be fair, I think that Tony Abbott had worked on a lot of this  and I notice that Malcolm Turnbull did give him some credit and I am also happy with  that. In terms of domestic violence - it is a black mark on Australian society. What  sort of country do we want our kids to see we are? What sort of nation do we want to  present ourselves to other people in the world where 63 women have been killed,  murdered by people who say they love them? It is unacceptable.    

 I firmly believe that domestic violence, family violence is a national crisis. So I am  pleased that the Liberal Party's talking about domestic violence just like the Labor 

 Party is. I am pleased for Rosie Batty and Ken Lay and all of the survivors if there is  interest in what they've been through. But it needs to go further. I do say this to the  Liberal Party and Malcolm Turnbull: good start, I'm really pleased. I also say that you  cut $22 million from legal aid funding, sorry, communities legal centres which help  women. Any person who has been through the system trying to recover from family  violence who has had to go through the family law courts, through dealing with the  post code lottery depending on does the magistrate get what’s happened to you or  are they old school and have no concept? What is important is that women going  through this system have legal advice and support. So I ask Malcolm Turnbull and  the Liberals, congratulations on what you've done, but please just find that other $22  million you've cut because otherwise we haven't even got to where we were before  the 2013 election.   

 And furthermore, women's refuges need to be properly funded, there’s been $88  million cut from women’s refuges. Anyone who has ever known someone who has  been through family violence often finds that someone the perpetrator gets the  reward of staying in the house and the women or the mother has to change jobs, has  to change accommodation, has to move the kids from school. Women's refuges  won't solve the problem of family violence but they will help those survivors get  through the next few weeks and months after terrible things have happened .  So I  say to Malcolm Turnbull great start, Labor, we can work together on there but this is  money which has been cut by the Liberal Government to community legal services  and there has been money cut from women's refuges, we need to deal with that too.   

 JOURNALIST: Was it wise for Malcolm Turnbull to say he would consider changes  to asylum seeker policy yesterday?   

 SHORTEN: You'd have to ask Malcolm Turnbull that. In terms of asylum seeker  policy Labor at our national convention has come up with I believe a very humane  policy when it comes to refugees. We proposed doubling the number of refugees we  take, before the Syrian crisis blew up, we believe fundamentally that Australia can  take more refugees. We've also proposed that when it comes to Manus Island and  Nauru that we sit down and talk to the Nauruan and Papua New Guinea  Governments to talk about bilateral mechanisms to ensure there is proper oversight.  Australian Governments cannot wash their hand of what happens in these facilities  when they're funding them. Of course we have to work with the particular  Governments where these facilities are but we believe that staff have the right if  they're concerned what they say to be able to say what's going on without facing  penalty, we also believe there's a big role in terms of the Ombudsman and looking  after the protection of children in these facilities.   

 JOURNALIST: Do you think if you became PM your resolve on boat people would  be tested by people smugglers?   

 SHORTEN: I think that people smugglers are criminal syndicates. These are not  altruists, what they do is they exploit vulnerable people legitimately seeking a better  life, they charge them up to $10,000 plus and put them in harm's way with the risk of  death and drowning. So I've got no doubt that criminal syndicate will always be trying  to test the resolve of Governments but I know that they will find no chink in our  armour when it comes to humane treatment of refugees, when it comes to making  sure that the criminals don't get back into business. We are as determined as  anyone else to defeat the criminal syndicates full stop. 

 

 JOURNALIST: Mr Turnbull has challenged you to put forward legislation amending  the China FTA, will you do that?   

 SHORTEN: Yes, no problems, what I'd also say on the China FTA is - and I've  spoken to Mr Turnbull about this directly - is this: we know you can't change the  treaty, Labor is not seeking to do that. We think that a China Free Trade Agreement  is a good thing but we also want to ensure that Australians are getting the  opportunities to work in Australia and getting priority. That's all. Now the Government  says that there's no problem and that any of the concerns we have won't materialise,  that's the basis for a negotiation. If they say there is no problem and legitimate  concerns have been expressed we'll work it out. I've been in far harder negotiations  than this but our priority is to make sure that when we have change in this country  doesn't matter if that's digital disruption or a China Free Trade Agreement, we want  to ensure that no-one gets left behind. See, that's one element which is fundamental  to Labor. We are ambitious about the future, we're confident about the future, have  the policies for the future, but we believe that there must always be the test of  fairness. I don't buy this argument that if change only works for some people that  that's good enough. Got to make change work for all Australians and that's what  we're doing today by making sure that we have got a platform to help Australia's  clever startups get turbocharge they need so that Australia can win the race to the  future for jobs and attracting the smart people to Australia.    

 Thanks everyone, have a lovely day.   

 ENDS   

