---
title: "Refugee settlement in Cambodia moves forward"
date: "2015-03-13"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211424995
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3717545%22
---

 Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Peter Dutton MP 

 Friday, 13 March 2015 

 Refugee settlement in Cambodia moves forward 

 Arrangements for the first group of refugees to be settled in Cambodia under the landmark  agreement announced last year are expected to be finalised in coming weeks. 

 The Minister for Immigration and Border Protection Peter Dutton was in Phnom Penh yesterday  to meet with Cambodian Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Interior, His Excellency (HE) Sar  Kheng, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation HE  Hor Namhong, the Director General of the General Department of Immigration HE General Sok  Phal, and other Cambodian officials. 

 'This visit provided an opportunity to reaffirm the close working relationship between my  Department and its Cambodian counterpart, the General Department of Immigration, to discuss  arrangements for settlement,' Mr Dutton said. 

 A delegation from Cambodia is expected to travel to Nauru within weeks to speak to refugees  living in the Nauruan community, about settlement options in Cambodia. This follows a previous  visit for the purpose of bilateral meetings between the Governments of Cambodia and Nauru. 

 Mr Dutton said Australia and Cambodia had reaffirmed their commitment to the voluntary and  permanent nature of the agreement which meets the international obligations of both countries to  offer protection and resettlement to refugees. 

 'I welcome Cambodia’s leadership on this vital regional issue and their commitment to finalise  settlement arrangements as soon as possible,' Mr Dutton said. 

 'In particular, I recognise Cambodia’s progression within a single generation from a devastating  civil war, through the rebuilding and reconstruction of their society, to a member of the  international community taking a leadership position in protecting the vulnerable.' 

 Mr Dutton also met with representatives of the International Organization for Migration (IOM),  who reaffirmed their support for the relocation and integration of refugees from Nauru to  Cambodia. Australia will meet the costs of the resettlement programme. 

 'Together with IOM, Australia and Cambodia are advancing the arrangement and committed to  its smooth and successful implementation,' Mr Dutton said.  

 

