---
title: "Reply to Ministerial Statement on Operation Sovereign Borders"
date: "2015-12-02"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/220597759
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4230431%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO 

 

 REPLY TO MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON OPERATION SOVEREIGN BORDERS 

 ***CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY*** 

 There is no question that ending the journey between Java and Christmas Island has  been a critically important measure for Australia and the Australian Government.      

 Ending this journey has ended a human tragedy which saw all too many people lose  their lives at sea.  I am sure everyone in this building, and across the country, hopes  this is now at an end, and that the people smugglers who perpetrated their despicable  trade are now out of business.      

 We, of course, support the achievement of ending this dangerous journey, and note it  as a remarkable achievement.  An achievement that is very important in the context of  the future development of a bipartisan position in relation to asylum seekers and  immigration more generally.    

 However, I do need to say that the air of self-congratulation that we see on the part of  this Government in relation to this policy is starting to become distasteful.  We, of  course, all remember the billboards on this issue that surrounded polling booths and  were paraded around during the 2013 Federal Election campaign.  There is no-one in  this Parliament who can deny the political significance the Coalition places on this  issue.      

 This, more than any other issue has been the one that the Coalition has gone to in order  to raise its banner.  In doing so, there has been a vigorous attempt to lay blame and  credit in particular places.      

 There is no doubt - and we have been quite up-front about it - that Labor made  mistakes during the period of the former Labor Government.  But it is also true that the  Coalition in doing its deal with the Greens during the course of 2011 and 2012 to stop 

 the Malaysian Arrangement really spoke to the most shining example of the political  expediency pursued by the Coalition in respect of this issue.      

 That measure - which could have brought an end to this journey four years ago - was  not able to be implemented and as a result more than 600 people lost their lives at sea.    

 So, when history looks to lay the blame for what occurred in the past, it will not be  nearly as straightforward as the Minister might suggest.  Equally, when history looks to  assign credit to how we have brought an end to the journey from Java to Christmas  Island, it will remember the Regional Resettlement Arrangement, which was put in place  by the then Labor Government and resulted in 90 per cent of the vessels from Java to  Christmas Island stopping before the current Government was even sworn into office.      

 There is no doubt that turning around the remaining 10 per cent of those vessels has  been a critical step taken by this Government, but this Government has enjoyed an  Opposition which has supported it in its endeavours to bring an end to that journey  between Java and Christmas Island - an enjoyment that was not shared by the former  Labor Government in respect of the former Coalition Opposition.      

 All of that said there remain very significant issues which are outstanding and need to  be addressed.    

 Offshore processing is a critically important step in bringing an end to this journey, but it  is not being run in anything like the efficient or humane way that we ought to see  happening in this country today.      

 We saw in the months after the Regional Resettlement Arrangement was reached by  the former Labor Government, the new conservative Government not even have a  conversation with its counterpart in Papua New Guinea about the resettlement of those  people who were in offshore detention in PNG.  As a result, we are more than two years  down the track and we are only just starting to see the beginnings of resettlement occur  in that country.      

 We have seen appalling decisions made in relation to the conditions that have persisted  in offshore processing - decisions such as keeping people living in tents on  Nauru.  This was a conscious decision by the Abbott/Turnbull Government to keep  people living in conditions which are much worse than what the former Labor  Government had planned to construct.  That really stands out when it comes to the  treatment of refugees, and it was an appalling decision that was made by this  Government.      

 We have seen for most of the last two and half years a substandard medical facility  existing on Manus Island - which, to be fair, has now been replaced by a very good  facility - but that was not until Mr Hamid Kehazaei died from preventable septicaemia in  that substandard medical facility.  There has been no attempt, no serious effort, to  engage in third-country resettlement, which is ultimately at the heart of what needs to be 

 done if we are to see the near 2,000 people on Manus Island and Nauru ultimately  resettled somewhere else in the world.      

 The attempt to go to Cambodia, spending something like $55 million on resettling three  or four people, has turned out to be an expensive joke.      

 We saw the announcement of an agreement with the Philippines, but within weeks of  that agreement being announced the Philippines Government made it clear that there  would be no permanent resettlement occurring in their country.      

 Then we saw run up the pole the bizarre flag of some kind of arrangement with  Kyrgyzstan.      

 What we now have remaining unresolved is the fate of those 2,000 people on Manus  Island and Nauru.  That continues to be a real sore in this country's handling of this  issue.    

 What oversees all of that is a total failure by this Government in terms of transparency.      

 Here in Australia, something like 30,000 people have been kept in limbo for years  because this Government stubbornly refused to process people until it had achieved its  temporary protection visa policy.  Then it also sought to put in place the fast-track  Immigration Assessment Authority - but it has not really ‘fast-tracked’ anything,  because in seeking to get that infrastructure up and running, people have been kept in  limbo and their situation has been essentially set in cement.      

 None of these are issues which are resolved today.      

 While I do absolutely agree with the achievement of the Government in having 12,000  Syrian refugees come to this country, it only happened after Labor called for this to  occur.  This was a government being dragged kicking and screaming to this decision.      

 But it does shine a light on the way in which future immigration policy should happen in  this country.  It should be based on bipartisanship and generosity.  That is how Australia  should proceed on this, not on the basis of the old partisan rhetoric, much of which we  have heard from the Minister today.    

 WEDNESDAY, 2 DECEMBER 2015   

 MEDIA CONTACT: NICK TRAINOR 0407 078 138 

 

