---
title: "Questions remain over undelivered letters addressed to Nauru detainees"
date: "2015-05-26"
creators:
  - "Bilyk, Catryna"
source: "Office of BILYK, SEN CATRYNA"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211857917
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3854370%22
---

 

 SENATOR CATRYNA BILYK  DEPUTY OPPOSITION WHIP IN THE SENATE  SENATOR FOR TASMANIA   

 QUESTIONS REMAIN OVER UNDELIVERED LETTERS ADDRESSED TO NAURU  DETAINEES   

 Senator Catryna Bilyk said that the Department of Immigration and Border Protection  had today failed to clearly explain why thousands of letters of support addressed to  asylum seekers at the Nauru Offshore Processing Centre had failed to be delivered.   

 Refugee advocate, Julian Burnside QC, had organised the letters from Australian letter  writers so they could establish a dialogue with detainees and offer them hope and moral  support.   

 Senator Bilyk called on the Minister for Immigration, Peter Dutton, to investigate the  Department’s failure to deliver the letters.   

 “Minister Dutton must explain why offshore detainees are being denied the right to  communicate with the outside world,” Senator Bilyk said. “He must confirm or deny Mr  Burnside’s claim that this is a calculated attempt to ‘break the spirit’ of the detainees.”   

 Senator Bilyk questioned the Department about the matter in Budget Estimates today,  but the Department took most of the questions on notice.   

 “It is now 11 months since Mr Burnside started asking questions about this matter. It is  disgraceful that despite ongoing email exchanges with Mr Burnside the Department still  struggled to answer the most basic questions,” Senator Bilyk said.   

 “It beggars belief that of the thousands of letters sent it appears that not one was  responded to by a Nauru detainee.   

 “This is just another example of the lack of transparency around the operation of  Australia’s offshore detention facilities.”   

 TUESDAY, 26 MAY 2015   

 MEDIA CONTACT: DANIEL HULME 0447 000 867   

