---
title: "Greens will use Senate powers to reveal truth on cash bribes for smuggling"
date: "2015-06-13"
creators:
  - "Hanson-Young, Sarah"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211913399
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3894309%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   

 Saturday 13 June 2015   

 Greens will use Senate powers to reveal truth on cash bribes for smuggling    

 The Greens will use parliamentary powers to force the Government to table documents relating to  the interception and 'turn-back' of an asylum seeker boat including any payments of monies to  individuals on board.  The Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young has said the Order to Produce  Documents will be put to the Senate as early as Monday next week.    

 "These allegations are extremely serious and the Parliament has both a right and responsibility to  find out what has really been going on," Greens spokesperson for Immigration Sarah Hanson-Young  said.    

 "The Greens will move an Order to Produce Documents forcing the Government to reveal what has  occurred out on the high seas and whether tax payer funds were spent paying off the crew of the  boat.   

 "Paying cash bribes to boat crews amounts to people trafficking.  The Government does not have a  mandate to break the law or a blank cheque to allow handing over wads of cash in the middle of the  ocean.    

 "The allegations must be dealt with immediately and Greens will use the powers of the Senate to  force the Government to come clean.    

 "The Prime Minister and his ministers can't keep dodging the questions. It's time to fess up and  explain what in fact has occurred.    

 "Australians deserve honesty about what their Government has been up to. The Prime Minister has  failed to be straight with the public so it is left to the Parliament to act.    

 "The Motion to produce documents will be introduced to the Senate on Monday.   

 

 Media Contact : Stephen Henderson : 0427 604 760   

