---
title: "Budget 2015: No vision for Australia as Government picks low hanging fruit with dull Federal Budget"
date: "2015-05-13"
creators:
  - "Siewert, Rachel"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENHOUSE OFFICE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/211754013
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/3828273%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE   AUSTRALIAN GREENS   SENATOR RACHEL SIEWERT    

 

 No vision for Australia as Government picks low hanging fruit  with dull Federal Budget    

  13 March 2015 

 

  Income support reduced from six months to one month    

 Australian Greens spokesperson on community services Senator Rachel Siewert said  that the ‘dull’ budget flops at revenue raising measures whilst continuing to vilify  Australians struggling to find work.    

 “Treasurer Joe Hockey is saying this budget enables every Australian to ‘have a go’. But  it doesn't, this budget once again targets the most vulnerable in our community and  undermines their ability to 'have a go'.      

 “The Government has again vilified vulnerable Australian’s in this budget with punitive  approaches to job seekers, condemning young people to periods without income  support, emphasising compliance and fraud, while also doing next to nothing to  genuinely increase employment.    

 “It is still cruel and counter-productive to exclude young people from income support  for extensive periods of time. One month off income support with no way to pay for  essentials will have harmful impacts on young people.    

 “This is still an uncaring, ideological attack on the young. We will continue to oppose  young people being pushed off income support, whether it be for six months or  one month    

  “Four weeks is long enough for a young person to get into a thousand dollars’ worth of  debt, as they try to pay their rent, feed themselves and incur the costs of job-seeking. If  they are not lucky enough to move off payments and into a job quickly, we are  condemning them to a poverty trap.    

 “The fact that Joe Hockey cannot admit this measure is cruel is an indication of how  little he understands about being out of work and living week-to-week”.    

 IT Upgrades aimed at catching people out    

 “The enormous investment in upgrading the IT infrastructure that underpins our social security  sector is long overdue but even here the focus isn’t on innovating and creating a better system  to help people into the future. Rather it is about compliance and fraud.    

 “The Government’s worldview is clear - those who are in need of help should be met with  distrust.    

 “These measures demonstrate Scott Morrison’s uncaring Ministerial style; his shift in  portfolio has simply moved him from vilifying asylum seekers to attacking people in  need of support”.    

 Newstart recipients remain in poverty    

 “Despite the repeated call for a $50 a week increase to Newstart, and the comprehensive review  of the payments system conducted by McLure over the past twelve months, the complete  inadequacy of this payment has not been addressed by the Government.    

 “Newstart is only indexed against CPI, and so every year that Government refuses to take action  is another year that this payment falls further and further behind community living standards.    

 “Imagine trying to find suitable accommodation, let alone also paying for food and transport  and all the other miscellaneous costs of life on $260 a week”.    

 Merging wage subsidies programs    

 “Young people, single parents and older unemployed workers will also have to wait six  months before becoming eligible for wage subsidy program that has been created by  merging the long term wage subsidy, the youth subsidy, the restart subsidy and the  Tasmanian jobs program.    

 “Despite it being streamlined, it is still too long to wait for this assistance. We will be  looking at this closely when estimates rolls around”.    

 Income management    

 “Bizarrely, income management is still on the books leading into the next financial year.  They have continued funding it despite their own reports showing it doesn't work.    

 “This is a glaringly obvious move to keep mining magnet billionaire Andrew Forrest  happy. $2.7 million has been committed to ‘facilitate consultation and engagement with  communities’ on the healthy welfare card which effectively increases income  management, despite evidence the approach is clearly ineffective.    

 “An undisclosed amount has also been committed to ‘trialling’ the healthy welfare card  across three undisclosed communities. This draconian measure needs to be ditched”.    

 Pensions    

 “Elderly Australians will breathe a sigh of relief that the pension indexation measures  were abandoned, but there was no commitment to the broader retirement incomes  that can look at the growing imbalance in retirement incomes caused by the flaws in the  super system, age discrimination and employment.    

 “The Government is picking what it thinks is the low hanging fruit with their changes to  the pension, but more must be done in this area to make sure all older Australians are  cared in retirement.      

 “We will be carefully scrutinising social security measures in the weeks ahead, the  Australian Greens will continue to stand up for those that are being left behind”.    

 

 

 Nadine Walker  Media Adviser  Office of Rachel Siewert | Australian Greens Senator for Western Australia  1/151 Brisbane St, Northbridge WA 6003 |P: 08 9228 3277 |F: 08 9228 4055  SG-113 Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600|P: 02 6277 3587 |F: 02 6277 5762  nadine.walker@aph.gov.au |M: 0418 401 180    

 

