---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 9 November 2016: proposed changes to the Racial Discrimination Act; US Presidential election"
date: "2016-11-09"
creators:
  - "Burney, Linda"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES"
subjects:
  - "proposed changes to the Racial Discrimination Act"
  - "US Presidential election"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/236944718
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4924744%22
---

 

 

 THE HON. LINDA BURNEY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES  MEMBER FOR BARTON    

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY, 9 NOVEMBER 2016   

 Subjects: Proposed changes to the Racial Discrimination Act, US Presidential  election    

 LINDA BURNEY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HUMAN SERVICES: I wanted to say a  few things regarding pushes to change the Racial Discrimination Act, basically by white  men of a certain age who have never experienced racial discrimination in their life.  Being at the end of racial discrimination and hate speech is long lasting in its effects, it’s  hurtful and it’s not the way in which we do business in this country. The fact that  Malcolm Turnbull in August said that he was not going to change the Racial  Discrimination Act, and we now see he’s talking about referring it off to a committee is  absolute evidence of just how dysfunctional and how weak his leadership is.    

 This would not be happening if it was not for the right wing of the Liberal Coalition  pushing for Malcolm Turnbull to refer the Racial Discrimination Act to a committee.  Can you imagine what it would be like if 18c was removed? And the idea that somehow  or other the Bill Leak cartoon is a reason to change 18c is a complete furphy. If you look  at the Racial Discrimination Act, there are protections in 18D for people like Bill Leak  and other commentators.    

 This place is a place where there is parliamentary privilege, and there is no way in the  world - there is absolutely no way that there is a need to change 18c, and Labor will  reject it flat out.    

 JOURNALIST: You don’t think there’s any - it’s overdue for just having a look at it and  see how it’s operating at all?    

 BURNEY: No. 18c is something that Labor created; the Racial Discrimination Act is an  important instrument in Australia. 

 The idea that a group of privileged basically white middle aged men think it should be  changed and then Malcolm Turnbull kowtowing to that, to the right wing of his party, is  in itself a reason to not pursue changing it.    

 If you look at the Racial Discrimination Act and all the parts of that act, there are  protections already for cartoonists and commentators. And this push to remove 18c  would be flatly rejected and is being rejected by the Labor party.    

 JOURNALIST: What about the process Linda, could that be improved so that  vexation  claims or those that can’t get up can be knocked on the head a bit earlier?    

 BURNEY: The issue this morning is Malcolm Turnbull, who said there would be no  changes to the Racial Discrimination Act in terms of 18C, now talking about referring it  off to a committee. That is not about improving process. That is not about changing the  way the act is implemented. That is about Malcolm Turnbull actually kowtowing to the  right wing rump of his party. That is total chaos. I have been around politics for a long  time.    

 The dysfunction of the Turnbull Government, the fact that Malcolm Turnbull stands for  absolutely nothing, is underscored by this particular issue of saying he’s now going to  refer 18c off to some sort committee.    

 There is absolutely no need for it. The protections for cartoonists, for opinion setters and  for the media are already there in 18D.    

 JOURNALIST: How do you think the Human Rights Commission is working?    

 BURNEY: I know the Human Rights Commissioner very well. And this faux war against  the Human Rights Commission is precisely that.  

 Gillian Triggs is a very fine woman, and so are the other commissioners whom I know  personally. The idea that somehow or other they are failing in their duty is something  that’s been created. This whole notion of having to refer 18C off to a committee, which  is part of the Racial Discrimination Act, is just an example of how dysfunctional and how  hopelessly tied Malcolm Turnbull is to the right wing of his party. That’s what we’re  seeing here. And there are no arguments around referring off the process to some sort  of committee; there is no need for any changes to the Racial Discrimination Act.    

 Where there is a need is for Malcolm Turnbull to stand up and be the person that he  held himself out to be 12 months ago. Clearly this Government is in turmoil. This  Government is a Government that cannot lay straight in bed, it really can’t. For the very  fact that they’re talking about 18c going off, the whole issue around refugees and push  to the absolute hard right of this party is what we’re seeing. Malcolm Turnbull doesn’t  believe in what he’s doing, he’s doing it to keep his job.    

 JOURNALIST: Trump or Clinton?    

 BURNEY: Clinton.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you hope it’s a clear result?    

 BURNEY: I think any man, or anyone, who puts themselves up to be the President of  the United States and says the things about women that Donald Trump has said, the  actions that have clearly been undertaken by him over the years, does not deserve to  be the most powerful person in the world.    

 

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: RHEUBEN FREELANDER 0422 044 390    

 

