---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne: 20 September 2016: marriage equality plebiscite; 'investment approach' to welfare; offshore processing"
date: "2016-09-20"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "marriage equality plebiscite"
  - "'investment approach' to welfare"
  - "offshore processing"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/234299281
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4829133%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS   AND ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS  

 MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  MELBOURNE  TUESDAY, 20 SEPTEMBER 2016   

 SUBJECTS:  Marriage equality plebiscite; ‘investment approach’ to welfare;  offshore processing.   

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning everybody, it's great  to be here. I am accompanied by some of my senior frontbenchers, Mark Dreyfus, Julie  Collins and Terri Butler.    

 We have just had the privilege to listen to leaders in the LGBTIQ community, hearing  their concerns about Mr Turnbull's $200 million opinion poll on marriage equality. The  people we have been listening to have explained to us their deep concerns, their  persuasive concerns, by this plebiscite, is a divisive, expensive and very poor idea in  terms of marriage equality. Mr Turnbull needs to start showing courage. The people I  met with, they have courage, the families they represent, they have courage. This  country wants to see more courage from Mr Turnbull, they want to see the courage to  show leadership. Increasingly, you just can't escape the conclusion that Mr Turnbull is  not interested in what everyday people are saying on marriage equality. He's just being  led from pillar to post by the hard right of his party and people who never want to see  marriage equality be a reality.    

 The case, according to the people we've met with, hasn't been made out to spend north  of $200 million. The emotional torment for people having their relationships examined in  a divisive debate hasn't been made out to the people we've met with. Also the fact that  his own party will not be bound by the outcome of a plebiscite, shows what a shocking  waste of taxpayer money this is. Really, when you think about it, we've got so many  issues which $200 million could go a long way to help alleviate. New medicine, more  nurses, more teachers, more doctors, improvements to Medicare which would mean  sick people get to see the doctor more. Instead of spending $200 million on things  which Australians really need, he is spending it to shore up his power base within the  Liberal Party. Australians are sick and tired of the lack of leadership of Malcolm 

 Turnbull. He won't lead on climate change. He won't lead on other issues, such as  marriage equality. But he is happy to backflip on superannuation, backflip on the  backpacker tax. Why is it that Malcolm Turnbull is more interested in changing his  policies on superannuation or the backpacker tax? The only thing that he is sticking to is  having a wasteful, divisive plebiscite.    

 I want to thank the people we met with today, and I and my colleagues are happy to  take questions on this matter.    

 JOURNALIST: If there is so much emotional torment you have discovered today, why  are you dragging out your decision on whether or not you will support a plebiscite, and  aren't you actually running your own small plebiscite within your own party and one side  of the argument?    

 SHORTEN: No. Let's be very, very unequivocal here. Malcolm Turnbull presented  legislation to the Parliament last week. We are actually interested in the views of the  community. That's why we have been meeting with leaders representing plenty of  groups in the lesbian, and the transgender, in the gay communities right across  Australia. I think it is courteous and respectful to talk to people and hear their views.  That's exactly what we are doing.    

 Mr Turnbull's recently on the weekend been sending signals that he wants to have  compromise. Compromise is letting your own MPs vote according to their conscience in  Parliament. I have a great deal for Malcolm Turnbull - we can save $200 million, you  can trust your own MPs to vote according to their conscious. Labor isn't asking  Parliamentarians who don't support marriage equality to change their mind and vote for  marriage equality. But what we are asking is letting the Parliament do its job. It's as  simple as that. Malcolm Turnbull's got to start showing leadership. This is a massive  shocking waste of $200 million.    

 Our Caucus will make its proper decision in the first week back in Parliament. And in the  meantime, we are letting the voices of the communities be heard, because in all of this,  I don't think Mr Turnbull has met with any of the groups since he has brought down the  plebiscite proposition.    

 JOURNALIST: You are only meeting one group as I understand what you have just  said. Those of the LGBTI communities -    

 SHORTEN: No, that is not right.    

 JOURNALIST: Are you meeting those who -    

 SHORTEN: We have met with community mental health services, I'll certainly -     

 JOURNALIST: From the other side of the argument?    

 SHORTEN: I'll certainly, as I've always done, talk to our leaders of faith-based  institutions, churches, of course.    

 JOURNALIST: Don't you already know what they think?    

 SHORTEN: I think that - I want to hear what they have to say, but I also want to explain  to them what we think. I want to explain to them that I don't think this is worth $200  million. I don't think it’s right in this country that Mr Turnbull's contracting out his day job  as a Parliamentarian and leader of Australia to a plebiscite.    

 There is a question which people have to answer. Why do gay people in Australia have  to go through a legislative, rule-making process that no one else does? Why do their  relationships have to undergo a $200 million taxpayer-funded opinion poll on the merit  of their relationships? It is deeply, deeply unfair. We have made many amendments to  the Marriage Act since the Marriage Act was brought into Parliament, first bought into  law. But only when it affects gay people, all of a sudden we have got to change the  rules. That is not right.   

 JOURNALIST: You want the Prime Minister to show leadership on this matter and  make a decision that you want him to make. You are not making a decision for weeks,  essentially, on this whole matter, allowing it to drag out. You are doing that for political  purposes, aren't you, just to have the Prime Minister on toast? Why don't you make a  decision?    

 SHORTEN: I love your question, Tony because it goes to the heart of the matter. Why  does Mr Malcolm Turnbull want to drag this issue out to February next year when we  can have a vote in Parliament, next week of parliamentary sitting? If you believe in what  you are saying there and I know you do, let's get on with this - let's have a vote the next  week when the parliament sits. You're quite right, what is the case to drag this debate  out, have kids, have their parents' relationships, analysed, dissected on taxpayer funded  campaigns? No, no, I think this whole thing has become a circus. Australians want this  country to deal with a range of issues.    

 We can have a vote on marriage equality if Mr Turnbull has the courage to let his MPs  vote according to their conscience. It is a marvellous compromise. It doesn't cost an  extra dollar of taxpayer money. We can get on and do it and the nation can focus on a  whole range of other issues which I know many Australians want us to do - jobs,  Medicare, a Royal Commission into the banks. There is plenty of stuff for this parliament  to work on and Mr Turnbull knows, he knows that if he was actually in charge of his  Government, he would snap his fingers and we would have a parliamentary vote. That  is the compromise, that's the sweet spot in this debate. That's one which we're going to  work towards.    

 JOURNALIST: He went to an election promising a plebiscite to be held. He won the  election -     

 SHORTEN: I went to an election promising to legislate for marriage equality and I am  keeping my views and values.    

 JOURNALIST: You didn't win though.    

 SHORTEN: This is this theory that Mr Turnbull says that because he got 76 votes out  of 150, the other 74 have to fall in line and be forelock-tugging butlers to Mr Turnbull. No  way, not ever. I tell you what, if Mr Turnbull wants to compromise, he should stop acting  so arrogantly, you know, Mr Harbour-side mansion, just expecting everyone to agree  with him. He knows, in his heart of hearts, that this plebiscite is going to cause harm. He  knows in his heart of hearts it is a shocking waste of $200 million. He knows in his heart  of hearts what the right thing is to do. But because we have a Prime Minister who is so  weak, he is captive, he is the ventriloquist’s dummy to the ventriloquists in hard-right of  the Liberal Party.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you think the Government's new investment approach to welfare is a  worthy idea?   

 SHORTEN: We always believe in long-term investments in welfare. But I think if the  Government really believes in the welfare for individuals and getting people out of the  cycle of poverty, they shouldn't cut Medicare. They should properly fund our schools.  They should properly fund child care. And while they are at it, they should spend less  time investing in the long-term welfare of our big banks and foreign multinationals, and  more time in looking after pensioners and people who are looking desperately for a job.  

 JOURNALIST: Do you think they can be trusted to do the right thing by young people  given they want to make them wait longer for the work for the dole payments?  

 SHORTEN: This Government is the worst friend that young Australians have ever had.  They want to make it more to cost to go to university. They want to send them off to  dodgy private providers in TAFE. They want them to pay more to go and see the doctor.  We all know that if they had their way they would make them pay more GST. They want  to cut their penalty rates, and now they want to make those who are unemployed wait  longer for the small money they get. This Government is not the friend of young people,  and don't get me started on what they're not doing on climate change and leaving for  future generations the problems that this lazy Liberal Government won't do right  now. Perhaps one or two more questions if there are any. 

 JOURNALIST: Will you support the Immigration Minister's plans to make changes to  the Migration Act so that if people from Nauru and Manus are given citizenship in  another country they still can't come to Australia?  

 SHORTEN: I just wish the Immigration Minister would focus on stopping indefinite  detention of people on Manus and Nauru. Labor does support keeping the people  smugglers out of business. I don't accept though, that means that some people have got  to stay in indefinite detention. And I notice that a lot of Mr Turnbull and Mr Dutton and  the others are out there lecturing the rest of the world. Well I think they need to explain  to not just the rest of the world but to Australians what's really going on in Manus and 

 Nauru, and when are they going to get those people out of indefinite detention and  make regional resettlement a reality? 

 JOURNALIST: Do you think we should be increasing our humanitarian intake in  Australia?  

 SHORTEN: Labor took a policy to the last election, we're reviewing it, but we don't see  any reason why we shouldn't increase our humanitarian intake. The fact of the matter is  we want to stop the people smugglers. The best way we can do that is help the nations  in the conflict zones, make sure that they are able to cope with the influx of refugees  there. That means that there is less pressure for people to come to Australia. And we  should do our fair bit internationally. But what the Government needs to do about Manus  and Nauru is actually negotiate genuine regional resettlement so that people aren't  stuck in indefinite detention. Thanks everybody.  

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053   

