---
title: "Transcript of joint doorstop interview: Adelaide: 19 February 2016: steel industry in South Australia; election; Nuclear Royal Commission; Gary Gray; asylum seekers"
date: "2016-02-19"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
  - "Champion, Nick"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "steel industry in South Australia"
  - "election"
  - "Nuclear Royal Commission"
  - "Gary Gray"
  - "asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/224384898
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4377148%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG    

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP   ADELAIDE  FRIDAY, 19 FEBRUARY 2016    

 SUBJECT/S: Steel in dustry in South Australia; Election; Nuclear Royal  Commission; Gary Gray; Asylum seekers    

 NICK CHAMPION, SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR  MANUFACTURING: Well, it's great to be here with Bill Shorten in Adelaide today and  we know this a critical time for South Australia. We've seen, since this Government was  elected, an assault on industrial base of this state. It doesn’t matter whether you look at  my electorate or Holden, or whether you look at ship building and submarine building, or  whether you now look a steel. We need someone in Canberra who's sticking up  for South Australians and for blue collar workers and we need a leader who's prepared  to do that. And every step of the way Bill Shorten has been that leader. Backing in auto  workers in the face of  Government in-action and  neglect and nonchalance on their  futures, backing in submarine workers and forcing this Government to the table to build  the 12 submarines in South Australia and backing in today steel working in Whyalla and  iron workers in Whyalla who need the Federal Government's help and need action from  the Federal Government. We currently have a Prime Minister who's more interested in  excitement and glamour and catching a tram to Toorak and getting a selfie and what  we actually need is a leader who backs in blue collar workers, backs in South  Australians, backs in Australians and that leader is Bill Shorten. It's great to have him in  Adelaide today.    

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Nick. Good morning  everyone. I want to thank my Parliamentary Secretary for Manufacturing, Nick  Ch 

 ampion. A son of South Australia and a champion for keeping manufacturing jobs in 

 South Australia. I'm here today because the steel industry in Australia, in particular  Whyalla, is at a tipping point. The decisions that the company makes, the South  Australian Government make and the Federal Government make will determine whether  or not Australia is still a country that makes steel. For 14 years before I went into  Parliament, I represented steelworkers and ironworkers in Whyalla, in Wollongong and  elsewhere and I have been appalled at the neglect, the dereliction of duty by the current  Liberal Government when it comes to manufacturing jobs. Remember that Joe Hockey  and Tony Abbott practically goaded the car companies to leave and they've done  nothing to help the submarine contract for South Australia. If it wasn't for Labor and  others kicking up a stink and fighting for South Australian submarine jobs, there's no  doubt in my mind that this Government would have already let the contract and the  submarines would have been built overseas. And her here we go again, we've got to  stand up for Whyalla steel jobs. I have written to the Prime Minister. I've written to them  on a number of occasions but I've written to them yesterday about the direct future of  the Whyalla steelworks and operations. There are measures which the Federal  Government, Mr Turnbull, working with the South Australian Government and the  Arrium company could put in place which will assist a sustainable future for steel  manufacturing in this country because right now the steel industry's under attack. What  we see is Chinese and Korean steel companies effectively engaging in the trade version  of match fixing and we need the rules to back up our jobs and our people. So what I  want to see is stronger anti-dumping laws. I want to see all levels of government, local  government, state government, national government, prioritising the purchase of  Australian steel. And again, I say to Mr Turnbull, that I would support and am open to  the option of co-investment in vital infrastructure in Whyalla including the wharf. Now is  the time that the Government roll up their sleeves. No more waffle, no more talk, no  more inaction, now's the time for action. The Australian steel industry is at a tipping  point and I say to Mr Turnbull, don't be the Liberal Prime Minister who waves goodbye  to the steel industry in Australia. I will work with you, Mr Turnbull, to save Australian  steel, Australian jobs and Australian manufacturing. Happy to take questions. Thank  you. 

 JOURNALIST: Unlike the car industry, perhaps you think it's worth investing that money  and that time to try and save that industry in Whyalla and that it can remain long term?    

 Yes, absolutely I do. Steel is in a category all on its own. We need a domestic steel  manufacturing industry for our economic independence. Once we stop making steel, we  will become price takers and we will have no ability to have any control over the price of  steel that goes into our projects. Now I do believe, and these are strong words, but  now's the time just for straight talk. Our steelworkers and our nation's manufacturing  sector deserves more. I believe the Chinese and Korean steel companies are engaging  in the trade version of match fixing. Australia needs to stand up for Australian jobs. Now  I'm prepared to do that. I'm saying there are measures in place. We spend scarce  taxpayer dollars very carefully. But I don't believe that Australian taxpayers object to an  expectation that when they're building buildings and vital infrastructure that we include a  proportion of Australian made content in these projects. It's what the rest of the world 

 does every day. I do believe that we can support smart procurement backing in  Australian jobs. I also believe that we need to toughen up our anti-dumping laws.  There's no doubt the rest of the world, the Europeans, the Americans, the Indians,  they're all standing up for their own manufacturing sectors. It's time that Australia got its  head out of the sand and stopped pretending there's a level playing field out there  because there's not and the only people that get damaged by this level playing field  philosophy of the Liberals are blue collar workers and their families. I also believe, going  specifically to the heart of your question, that what Labor would do and what  Government should do is help make markets work efficiently and sometimes that may  involve co-investment and vital infrastructure to help give Arrium the breathing space.  I'm not saying that we co-invest in the wharf or the port forever. I'm not saying that we  couldn't then move it back to the market, but right now, if we let these jobs go, we will  see fewer rates being paid, more unemployed. There's no free lunch and Australia  needs to back in Aussie jobs.    

 JOURNALIST: If there is a risk, though, that Government could throw money at the  problem and it won't change one of the fundamental issues which is low commodity  prices?    

 You're quite right. Low commodity prices are part of the pressure that Arrium's feeling  and I don't blame the Government for that. But, you know, commodity prices in the long  term do move upwards. What I don't want to see is that when eventually prices move  up, that we can't take benefit of it because we no longer make those jobs here. You  know, our job is not just to be a quarry for the world, it's to value add. It's no good just  shipping off our iron ore overseas and not value adding some of that here. And that's  what I like about Arrium and the steel making business. It's integrated so that we not  only dig up our minerals but we actually convert it into value added product. Australian  steel is of excellent quality around the world, the Australian steelworker is a highly  productive, multi-skilled operator. I just think what we need now is for the Government  to show the sort of leadership - when will the Turnbull Government start doing  something about Australian jobs?    

 JOURNALIST: You say the Treasurer talks about it being really difficult to convince  other State Treasurers that the cheapest option isn't always the best. Do you agree with  that assessment?     

 No, I don't actually. As I said to you, I've worked in the representing the steel industry  for a decade and a half and quite often what is the cheapest is not always the best. No,  I've seen plenty of projects where the benefit of having locally made steel and being  able to amend the contracts, being able to make sure that the work is, you know, job  specific, Australians do this pretty well. Also you have to ask yourself what are other  countries around the world doing? See, other countries get that having a steel industry  is important to national security. Steel is a vital component of our warships, it's a vital 

 component of our infrastructure. We would be mugs if we waved goodbye to the steel  industry just because we'd swallowed some right-wing economic textbook which said  we should only do certain things in this country. We need a manufacturing industry, we  need a steel industry, and if we give that away, then what our country's policymakers  are doing is diminishing the chances of Australia being an independent economic nation  in the future.    

 JOURNALIST: With the anti-dumping issue, you're calling for this now, shouldn't you  have been calling for it years ago and Arrium might not be in this situation now?    

 I was, if you do a Google search of what I've been talking about with anti-dumping you  will find from the early 2000s when I was representing steelworkers I've been doing  exactly that. I've got a track record in standing up for Australian steel. I'll fight for this. I  know we're the Opposition, we're not in charge, Malcolm Turnbull is the one that can  make the decisions but I put the Liberal Government on notice. We will hold you  accountable if you lose the steel industry, but we're not just making those sort of tough  comments. We will work with the Liberal Government. I do see there's opportunities for  co-investment. I see there's opportunities for local procurement. I see there's  opportunities to strengthen anti-dumping laws and certainly I've been on the record for a  decade and a half about our steel jobs because I understand these are good jobs. In the  Whyalla community, as in other regional communities in Australia, good manufacturing  jobs are what allow you to pay the mortgages, pay the bills, make sure the kids get the  best start in life. These jobs have a massive multiplier effect for the future generations of  Australians.    

 JOURNALIST: Co-investment, how much money do you think could be put on the  table?    

 We'll have more to say about that in coming days. We are actually actively costing what  is required. We really need Malcolm Turnbull to come to the party. I mean, this might  not be part of his smart and agile innovative, high-tech age but let me just tell him. Steel  jobs are as worthwhile as any other jobs in this country. We'll work with him. The South  Australian Government's rolled up its sleeves, Tom Koutsantonis has been hitting the  phones, determined what he can and of course the Arrium company has got to weigh  up what it does. It's got debt, it's got commodity prices, it's got to work through its  issues, how does it reduce costs but what the community need to hear, what Arrium and  its investors need to hear, what its lenders need to hear is that the Government of  Australia is on the side of Australian jobs. I am, time for Mr Turnbull to stand up.   

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, briefly on another matter, Christopher Pyne this  morning has come out and flagged the possibility of the Government potentially using a  double dissolution trigger to call an early election. What do you make of that option still  being live and on the table? 

 

 SHORTEN: Labor's not afraid of an election but the Liberals are afraid of the Budget.  They need to tell us what their economic plans are. I think it's the height of arrogance  that the Liberals, they're like magicians, they're always trying to get you to look  somewhere other than where the trick is taking place. You know, this Government for  the last five and a half - six months has had the GST 15 per cent on the table. Because  of Labor, because of our campaign it's taken that off the table. But now, what do they  actually stand for? They're all waffle and no action. It doesn't matter if it's steel jobs,  what they're going to do on negative gearing, what they're going to do on the funding of  schools, what they're going to do on tackling climate change, what are they going to do  about properly funding our hospitals in South Australia and elsewhere, what are they  going to do to stand up for Australian jobs? This is a Government with no clear plan  other than cut, cut, cut. They need to tell us what's in the Budget. They need to stop  threatening the Australian people with the threat of early elections, just to cover up their  lack of action on the economy of Australia.    

 JOURNALIST: Are you prepared to fight that election, though, around issues of union  corruption?    

 SHORTEN: I'm prepared to fight this election around these following five issues - a fair  taxation system, standing up for Australian jobs, a properly funded Medicare system  where it's your Medicare card, not your credit card that determines the level of your  healthcare, we'll fight it around schools, TAFE and universities where working class and  middle class kids, every child gets every opportunity in every school, and we'll fight it on  making sure we've got fair dinkum policies on renewable energy. And let me just go to  the specific you said - Labor is anticorruption, Mr Turnbull's just antiunion.    

 JOURNALIST: When do you think we will see a clearer policy from you about the  possible idea of nuclear in South Australia? We talked to you on Tuesday, you said you  were still considering it, when will that crystallise?    

 SHORTEN: I appreciate your enthusiasm for us to come to a landing, it's now Thursday.  What we've said is that we'll have careful look at the Royal Commission. What we've  said is identical to what's been said in South Australia by people from the environmental  movement across to the energy sector. We've said that we want to make sure that the  economic benefits actually really stack up. We will also guard jealously our  environment. We're very much a jobs, jobs, jobs political party in Labor but we also want  to protect our environment and there has to be that vital ingredient community support.  Now we've made it very clear that for low-level nuclear waste from the nuclear medicine  industry, for example, we should have safe storage in this country. Certainly the Royal  Commission's made it clear something which I've always personally believed a full-on  nuclear industry in this country is not economically viable. Then there's this debate  about do we take waste from other countries. We're not going to rush answer that 

 question at the federal level and we want to make sure that the economic benefits are  really spelt out versus costs, that the environmental impact is fully understood and of  course there is community support. So this won't be a 48-hour decision. It's a longer  process.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you believe that on the election, do you believe that Gary Gray is  just being a pessimist when he says Labor can't win the next election?    

 SHORTEN: Labor's the underdog at the next election but we've frequently been the  underdog and we've frequently surprised. Gary Gray has served Australia in distinction  in various roles for many decades. I understand he wants to rack his cue and that's fine.  I just want to promise Labor voters and indeed all Australians, that I and Labor do not  intend just to run a happy second. What we will do is between now and the election  every day, we will try our hardest not only to be a strong Opposition, but to be a strong  alternative government. I can promise Australians that if you care about Australian jobs,  properly funded Medicare, properly funded schools, TAFE, universities and early years  learning, if you care about real action on the environment and renewable energy and if  you want to make sure that we have a fair taxation system, well then, you know, with  action against multinationals not paying their fair share, well then Labor's the party you  need to consider at the next election.     

 JOURNALIST: [Inaudible] would you welcome New Zealand taking asylum seeker  children?    

 SHORTEN:  Yes, and Labor's done this in the past with John Key. Julia Gillard came to  arrangements with New Zealand. Of course, we just want to see the children out of  detention but we don't want to see the people smugglers back in business. It is terrible  some of the reports that we hear from Manus and Nauru and I, like most Australians,  find it very distressing and these people are in our care and they do deserve, in my  opinion, a better standard of care than they've been receiving. So I really hope that  something can be worked and it shouldn't have come to this. Waiting times for people in  these detention facilities has doubled under Mr Turnbull and his Liberals and if there's  belated attention going to talking to the New Zealand Government I welcome that  because these issues should be above politics. Thanks everyone.    

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053   

 

