---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Launceston, Tasmania: 23 May 2016: Andrew Nikolic; Labor's $150 million UTas investment; Liberals deal with the Greens; Pontville Detention Centre; LGBTI Discrimination Commissioner; backpacker tax; dairy"
date: "2016-05-23"
creators:
  - "Polley, Helen"
source: "SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR AGED CARE"
subjects:
  - "Andrew Nikolic"
  - "Labor's $150 million UTas investment"
  - "Liberals deal with the Greens"
  - "Pontville Detention Centre"
  - "LGBTI Discrimination Commissioner"
  - "backpacker tax"
  - "dairy"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/228329660
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4584201%22
---

 

 

 SENATOR PENNY WONG  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INVESTMENT  SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA 

 

 SENATOR HELEN POLLEY 

 SHADOW PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY FOR AGED CARE  SENATOR FOR TASMANIA   

 ROSS HART  CANDIDATE FOR BASS 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW   

 Monday, 23 MAY 2016   

 SUBJECT/S: Andrew Nikolic, Labor’s $150 million UTas investment, Liberals deal with the Greens,  Pontville Detention Centre, LGBTI Discrimination Commissioner, Backpacker Tax, dairy.   

 SENATOR PENNY WONG: Hi everyone, I am here also with my senate colleague Helen Polley, back  here in Launceston where I have been a few times as a Labor frontbencher. This is a very important  region not only for Tasmanians, but also for the Labor Party. We understand the economic challenges  that are facing North and North-West Tasmania and we understand the importance of a federal  Government that is prepared to work with the local community in order to create jobs, in order to  ensure we’ve got good schools and universities which are accessible for all.  We’ve already made some very substantial announcements early in this campaign - $150 million for  the University of Tasmania, which is about local jobs and long term investment in Tasmanians where  there are estimates that a thousand Tasmanians who could get into higher education if they had the  opportunity. Well a Labor Government wants to give them that opportunity. We want to give them that  opportunity because it’s not only good for them but it’s good for the local economy.  In addition, we’ve also said that we will invest in local schools. We will make the difficult decisions  necessary to ensure we have proper investment in local schools. We all know, the best way we can  help our kids is to make sure they get the best education possible, we know that. And we know that  there are too many kids that are left behind in regional schools, in country schools and even in urban  areas with disadvantaged schools. Every kid across Tasmania should have the opportunity to have  the best education they can. It’s good for them, it’s good for the family and it’s good for the Tasmanian  economy.  I want to also talk about Andrew Nikolic. Mr Nikolic tells Liberal voters he’s a conservative, he tells  Liberal voters that the Greens are disconnected from Tasmanians, he tells Liberal voters are anti jobs,  but he’s prepared to be part of a party that did a deal with the Greens. Let’s be clear that there is a  deal on the cards between the Liberals and the Greens which would see, if successful, more Greens  elected to the Parliament. So my question to Andrew Nikolic is this: why are you supporting a deal to  get more Greens into the Parliament? Tell your Liberal supporters why you’re doing that.   

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible] are you doing down here in Bass?   

 WONG: This is a national arrangement which involves the Liberals preferencing the Greens ahead of 

 Labor in key seats in Victoria and involves the Greens stopping their preference and ending their  practice of preferencing Labor in other seats. So no less of a person than Michael Kroger who is a  well-known Liberal identity has made clear, that this is the arrangement he is pursuing.   

 JOURNALIST: How’s it any different to how Labor and the Greens work together in the past?   

 WONG: Well, let’s be clear, Labor tries to get Labor people elected. We don’t try to get Greens  elected, we don’t try to get Liberals elected. We’re the alternative party of Government, we’re trying to  take seats off the Liberals which is why Ross Hart is here with me working so hard. We’re not trying to  get more Greens into the Parliament, the only party that is doing that at the moment is the Liberal  Party.   

 JOURNALIST: And the Liberals say that they’ve never had any kind of alliance with the Greens.  What do you say to that?   

 WONG: Well you’ve got an alliance that Michael Kroger has already talked about that’s about getting  more Greens into the Parliament. Simple as that.   

 JOURNALIST: What’s your evidence that this is happening in this seat?   

 WONG: This is a national deal and I’d invite you to look at what Michael Kroger has said. But look,  the issue isn’t this seat, the issue is nationally what the Liberals do with the Greens and I think the  Andrew Nikolic you see is “I am anti-Green”, that’s what he says, well he’s part of a party that’s  delivering preferences that could elect more Greens to the Federal Parliament. I think that is relevant  to the Liberal voters here in this seat.    

 JOURNALIST: The Pontville Detention Centre in Tasmania has been sold to a local farmer for well  under $15 million it cost to set up with valuable infrastructure still on site. Should the current  Government […inaudible…] to the taxpayers?   

 WONG: Look I can’t comment on the detail of those commercial arrangements.   

 JOURNALIST: Well what should the centre have been used for?   

 WONG: I’m not going to comment on the detail of those commercial arrangements. Obviously the  Government would be across the detail of that.   

 JOURNALIST: well would Labor support being used to house Syrian refugees temporarily?   

 WONG: I’m not aware of that proposition, but as I said these are matters that the Government would  have been across at the time the decision was made.   

 JOURNALIST: On Saturday you made an announcement regarding the LGBTI. How would that affect  Tasmania?   

 WONG: Labor has a view about the importance of the human rights commission, we have a view  about the importance of a colony and our position has been consistent over decades. We have a  number of commissioners under the federal commission who go out and advocate for colony and  advocate for partnerships, they try and talk to people about how we can build a more inclusive  Australia. You’ve seen good examples of that with the Age Discrimination Commissioner who has  been looking at how we get more elderly people into the workforce, we have seen the Race  Discrimination Commissioner working with institutions like the AFL to reduce the incidences of racism  in our society and we envisage that this Commissioner will work in the same way.   

 JOURNALIST: And so would they help Tasmanians?   

 WONG: I think this is about making sure a society which is more equal and inclusive. We know that  there are some people who suffer discrimination because they are gay or lesbian and we know that  homophobia still exists, so we need to all work together to combat this kind of prejudice which is what  this Commissioner will do. 

 

 JOURNALIST: The NFF have put out a statement today and they seem a little confused about  Labor’s position on the backpacker tax. Can you just restate what that is?   

 WONG: Well I haven’t seen the NFF statement, but I would say this on the backpacker tax: everyone  should remember that this was a tax introduced by the Liberal National Party in their 2015 Budget.  And I don’t know and nor do the farmers know, I suspect, what Barnaby Joyce has been doing for the  last year because everyone was told this would be resolved, and then in the 2016 Budget it’s  appeared without any change. Richard Colbeck then said “oh no we’re reviewing it”, well the  document, the pre-election economic and fiscal outlook which was released last week still maintains  the full backpacker tax as the Government’s policy. So it’s quite clear that the Government hasn’t  shifted from its position despite what Richard Colbeck and Barnaby Joyce have said.  When it first came out we said we were prepared to support it on the basis the Government had done  its homework, well I don’t think the Government has done its homework, so we’re certainly looking at  that issue very carefully. It’s already been raised with me here in Launceston and the affect it is  having on the agricultural sector […inaudible…].   

 JOURNALIST: Barnaby Joyce has written to Labor about the dairy prices and what can be done to  the dairy industry. Do you know what Labor’s response to that would be?   

 WONG: Firstly, he’s taken a while to get off the mark on that. This has been an issue for some time  and some very concerning announcements made by the major companies including the  retrospectivity of the drop in milk prices. A lot of farmers are obviously very deeply concerned of being  financially affected. This has been on the cards for some time. We’re willing to work with the  Government and I think Joel Fitzgibbon has responded publically that we are willing to work with the  Government but there is very little that has been proposed by Barnaby. On this issue we are up for a  sensible bi-partisan approach to make sure that the dairy farmers get through this crisis.   

 JOURNALIST: What kind of assistance would you guys offer?   

 WONG: I would like us to work through this with the Government and I’m sure Joel Fitzgibbon will  have more to say about that. But it’s quite clear we’ve got an immediate problem that is affecting the  viability of the dairy industry. The retrospectivity has been raised with all of us, I am sure it’s been  raised with you in the media and it certainly has been raised with politicians. It has an immediate  effect on our farmers and there are a range of things that can be looked at. We’re up for a sensible  approach but Barnaby has to put his cards on the table.   

 LABOR CAMPAIGN MEDIA CONTACT  Email: media@chq.alp.org.au   

