---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Orange airport, New South Wales: 31 October 2016: Orange by-election; infrastructure investment; tourism; asylum seekers; Labor Party"
date: "2016-10-31"
creators:
  - "Albanese, Anthony"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT, CITIES AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT"
subjects:
  - "Orange by-election"
  - "infrastructure investment"
  - "tourism"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Labor Party"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/236342303
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4909353%22
---

 

 

 

 THE HON ANTHONY ALBANESE MP 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT, CITIES AND REGIONAL  DEVELOPMENT  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER 

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  ORANGE AIRPORT  MONDAY, 31 OCTOBER, 2016    

 Subjects: Orange by-election; infrastructure investment, tourism, asylum seekers, Labor  Party.   

 ANTHONY ALBANESE: It’s fantastic to be here today with Bernard Fitzsimon, Labor’s  candidate for the Orange by-election that takes place in just two weeks’ time. That is a critical  opportunity for the voters of Orange to make sure that no longer can they be taken for granted  by the Coalition. I have been a regular visitor to the Central West. As a Minister I came here to  the Central West with funds: funds for the Orange Bypass; funds for the airport upgrade that we  see behind us; funds for the upgrade of the aquatic centre here in Orange; funds for the Inland  Rail; funds for bike paths.  We delivered in Government for the Central West and for the Orange electorate in particular.  But the National Party have just taken it for granted. We saw their arrogance when they  intervened to say that they would stop greyhound racing without any consultation and any  process whatsoever. And we see at the Federal level as well them taking Orange for granted  and taking the Central West for granted. It took a Labor Government to fund the upgrade of the  Great Western Highway, the Orange Bypass and the Inland Rail Line.  This Government have failed to put a single dollar into Inland Rail since they came to office. We  had $900 million - almost $600 million for the upgrade of the existing track that will form part of  the line and $300 million for new investment, which the current Government has continued to  spend but claim as its own without putting in any additional funds in their first budgets.  So what we see in two weeks’ time is that Labor has a candidate who’s a local who is  committed to delivering for the Central West in this by-election and beyond. And it’s a real  opportunity to send a message, a strong message, that the people of the Central West don’t like  being taken for granted. And can you imagine the effort that will be put in if Labor is successful  in two weeks’ time in winning this by-election? You will have regular visitors for a change here in  Orange from the Coalition state and federal governments and you might actually get some  investment and some action because up to now that certainly hasn’t been the case. I might ask  Bernard if he wants to add anything.   

 BERNARD FITZSIMON: OK. I think Anthony has covered it pretty comprehensively here. The  problem is that Labor are committed to rural and regional development, committed to delivering  infrastructure in rural and regional areas -  the problem lies in the Nationals. They are not the  men for the job. They have proven that consistently since March 2011, when the Baird-Grant  Government was elected. It is time to shake the regions up and Labor are committed to doing it.   

 REPORTER: We’ve seen a slew of both Coalition and Labor - everybody under the sun 

 members - have come out here in the lead-up to this by-election. I guess the truth of it is you  wouldn’t be here if there wasn’t a close contest there. Will you show up after this by-election?   

 ALBANESE: Well, I think I can stand on my record of when I have been here before with major  announcements of funding for the aquatic centre, for the bypass. There’s a child care centre  right in the centre of Orange with a plaque with my name on it, funded through the local  community infrastructure program.  When I was the Regional Development Minister and Local Government Minister we delivered  for regional Australia. What has happened under this Government is that they take it for  granted. They think it’s automatic that they will get elected and that they don’t have to do  anything to earn or keep that support from voters here in the Central West or indeed voters  anywhere throughout regional Australia.  So the fact is that I have come here not just at election time, but regularly. I came here at least  five times as a minister during the Rudd and Gillard governments. We brought the Cabinet here  to regional Australia, here to the Central West, when we were in government. We were regular  visitors and we gave support for good projects here to create jobs in the short-term but also to  deliver long-term economic productivity, to improve road safety. All of those projects - the  bypass, the aquatic centre - none of those were election commitments. That’s just what we did  when we were in government. And I know that Luke Foley, if he has Bernard Fitzsimon in his  team, he will deliver for this region as well. I know Luke is here tonight at a public meeting at  Molong and that is typical of his commitment to engaging one on one.  This morning I have a round table with the tourism sector that follows tourism round tables I  have been having right throughout Australia, but particularly in regional Australia. I mean, you  had under this Government the backpacker tax introduced at the federal level. Not a squeak out  of the National Party at the state level saying that this was a bad idea. They just all went along  with it. Now they are scrambling for some sort of compromise in order to dig themselves out of a  hole because they know that in the agriculture sector people were saying that they weren’t  going to plant crops because they didn’t know if they could be picked. And in the tourism sector,  it was having a big impact as well. They rely upon backpackers and yet this Government, this  Government federally, in partnership with the Baird-Grant Government in NSW, were quite  happy to ignore those issues.   

 REPORTER: We’ve talked a lot about what Labor has done. But what would you look to do if  Bernard was elected?   

 ALBANESE: Well, what we would do is have someone at the state level who could talk to state  Labor and the federal Labor oppositions but also talk to the Government - get them jumping. I  think you would see if Bernard is successful in two weeks’ time, enormous resources being put  into this seat and a focus being put into this seat. So this is a one-off opportunity when you have  a by-election to ensure that the focus of the NSW Government, as well as the focus of the  Federal Government, is on this region over the next at least two years in the lead-up to the next  election which is way off of course, in March, 2019.  So you have two and a half years for Bernard Fitzsimon to deliver for this seat and I am sure it  will have attention.  And If I was someone who was weighing up what way to vote in two weeks’ time and I wasn’t a  card carrying member of the National Party, or maybe even if I was, I’d be thinking very strongly  about casting a vote for Labor and doing this because it will have such a strong impact if  Bernard is elected in a couple of weeks’ time.   

 REPORTER: You mentioned infrastructure and a few of those things - Inland Rail and  highways (inaudible). Obviously no commitment from the Nationals or no development. Can you  give us any solid commitment on any of those, like such the Inland Rail?   

 ALBANESE: What we can give a commitment to is we’d get on with building it. I was the  minister who commissioned and completed the study into the Inland Rail line and route. That  was completed way back in 2010. We immediately then put funding towards the project - $600 

 million which has already been spent while we were in government - that was about  straightening the existing parts of the line that will form part of Inland Rail. And what’s more, we  committed $300 million for the new sections. Now the National Party have now been in  Government for more than three years. This is their second term. And what they are saying isn’t  that any commitment to construction be given this term because they held off and had more  studies with more National Party former leaders leading the study. The only jobs that have been  created by the National Party are jobs for former National Party ministers and Deputy Prime  Ministers being appointed to have committees to tell us what we already know. The Inland Rail  line is ready to go. It is up to this Government to proceed with construction. That is what Labor  would be doing.  If Labor had been been re-elected in 2013 the project, in terms of the new  parts of the project, would be well under construction by now.   

 REPORTER: There’s a parliamentary inquiry begins today into (inaudible). What do you think  about that?   

 ALBANESE: Look, I’ll leave that to our members of the committee to participate in that.  Parliamentary inquiries are important to get information through those processes. What we  know is that there have been big problems in the NSW Health system under Jillian Skinner. And  it’s not just Labor saying that, it’s her own colleagues and I think Jillian Skinner will be moved on  soon enough.  There is a crisis of confidence in the Baird Government and it’s not just from the people of NSW,  it’s from their own internal members. That’s why you have chaotic decision-making taking place.  The extraordinary decision to ban greyhound racing without any notice whatsoever, then the  extraordinary backflip, having said that that wouldn’t occur.  Across a a range of issues, be it health, be it education where the State Government is brawling  with the Federal Government over the Gonski reforms that will have a particular impact on  regional Australia. Or be it the federal cuts to Financial Assistance Grants to local government  that are having a real impact here in regional NSW. Because local government relies upon  Financial Assistance Grants for the maintenance and upkeep of its local road system. Now the  freezing of grants at a saving of billions of dollars to the Federal Government has come at the  expense of that local roads maintenance and yet you have the State Coalition not prepared to  have a squeak out of them about these cuts.   

 REPORTER: Talking of regional development, we just saw recently that in the latest round of  Stronger Regions funding, $28 million out of $40 million went to metro areas. Do you think that’s  fair?   

 ALBANESE: I think this is a government that has made its Stronger Regions funding, like other  funding, simply politically based. When I was the Minister for Regional Development we had a  system whereby every one of Australia’s 565 councils got funding for regional economic  development and for local programs. And on top of that, there were programs specifically  designed to do major upgrades  above $2 million. Now the Orange Aquatic Centre was one of  the beneficiaries of that program. And in addition Orange Airport here was another beneficiary  of that program. We funded regional economic development because, we believe that it is  absolutely critical. And it is extraordinary the neglect that has been there for Orange from the  Federal Government and they need to do much better.   

 FITZSIMON: Can I add a comment to that? You can’t cut funding for public services; you can’t  compromise people’s education and health outcomes in rural and regional NSW and say that  you are committed to solving the problem. The Nationals are not doing it.  You can’t decimate  these small communities, compromise the integrity of small businesses and compromise the  employment of local people like the tradies contractors suppliers etc. They are not spending the  money out here. Despite the rhetoric, the money is not being spent.   

 REPORTER: So will you and Labor back the Government’s proposed asylum changes that  impose life bans on those who try to reach Australia illegally? 

 

 ALBANESE: Well of course we haven’t see the change so we can’t be expected to make final  determinations without seeing the proposals. Because what we have seen in the past is that  what they say is going to be in legislation actually isn’t in legislation. But I am somewhat  perplexed and I think the Government has got a major question to answer, which is: Why is this  legislation necessary? We went through an election campaign whereby they said they had  solved the issue of people smuggling and now just a couple of months later, they say that  wasn’t the case. What is that is needed to be fixed? That is a question that the Government has  to answer. Otherwise, were they not telling the truth in the election campaign when they said  that they had got the policy right?   

 REPORTER: The idea of a life ban though. I mean the concept of it ...   

 ALBANESE: Well we’ll wait and see what the proposal actually is. But the truth is there are two  facts here. One is the government said that it had the policy settings right. It appears now that it  is contradicting what it told the Australian people before the election. Second is, they need to  explain to the Australian people what their actual plan is for the people on Manus and on Nauru.  They need to have a plan. Labor is opposed to indefinite detention and they need to solve that  practical problem before they engage in politics, which is what we are seeing here given the  lack of detail and the lack of explanation from the Government about why they think this change  is necessary.   

 REPORTER: What’s your response to the Morgan Poll suggesting Tanya Plibersek is the most  popular choice for Labor Leader?   

 ALBANESE: Well look, we have a process of the leadership. Tanya is a fantastic member of  our team led by Bill Shorten.   

 REPORTER: Do you think it is good to see women coming to the forefront here?   

 ALBANESE: I think that we have a leader and that leader is Bill Shorten.   

 REPORTER: There’s no plans to change that any time soon?   

 ALBANESE: That leader is Bill Shorten.    

 ENDS  MONDAY, 31 OCTOBER, 2016  MEDIA INQUIRIES: MATTHEW FRANKLIN 0411 659868   

 

 

 

 

 

