---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Launceston, Tasmania: 2 November 2016: Senate inquiry into the backpacker industry; agriculture sector; tourism"
date: "2016-11-02"
creators:
  - "Polley, Helen"
source: "SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER TO THE LEADER"
subjects:
  - "Senate inquiry into the backpacker industry"
  - "agriculture sector"
  - "tourism"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/236436779
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4911015%22
---

 

 

 SENATOR HELEN POLLEY 

 SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER TO THE LEADER (TASMANIA)  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR AGEING  SENATOR FOR TASMANIA   

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  LAUNCESTON  WEDNESDAY, 2 NOVEMBER 2016 

 

 SUBJECTS: Senate inquiry into the Backpacker Industry, Agriculture sector and  Tourism   

 JOURNALIST: Helen, so how is the inquiry going?   

 SENATOR HELEN POLLEY: Well today we very clearly heard evidence of how this  Government once again have demonstrated they’re dysfunctional and shambolic.  There  was no consultation before they brought in this legislation to the sector.  Quite clearly the  primary industry sector in this state has been undermined.  If we are taking about the  vegetable growers, fruit growers and the list goes on.  If there’s not a resolution to this,  some farmers may be forced to close their doors and walk away.  This is really  unfortunate.  Because all along what we’ve said is we need this workforce.  There’s a lot  more to this issue, rather than just tax.  It’s the public profile that we have.  We’re a clean  green state.  Our reputation is at stake here and what we don’t want to see is exactly what  happening.  The Government is trying to pressure the sector into supporting the 19 per  cent tax because it’s better than the 32 per cent tax.  This could have been handled 18  months ago.  Now we’re in the situation where the sector, as I said we’ve got farmers who  may be forced to close their doors and walk away.  This is outrageous.  This is too  important, this is above politics, this is about the state’s economy and this is about the  individual growers and producers of this state.   

 JOURNALIST:  The Coalition has, I guess roots in agriculture and the land through the  Nationals.  Why do you think they’ve done this?   

 POLLEY:  I think it’s just another demonstration of Malcolm Turnbull’s inability to  lead.  It’s a dysfunctional Government.  They have thought bubbles that pass through  every other day.  We’ve just experienced another one on Sunday with the outrageous  changes to refugees being able to settle or even visit this country.  This issue about  backpackers and the tax is just another example of how this Government is out of their  depth.  They have not got the skills.  They don’t have a leader, they have a Prime Minister  who will say and do anything.  But can’t deal with the issues of the day.   

 JOURNALIST:  And where would Labor like to see the backpacker tax?   

 POLLEY:  We want to see the backpacker tax arrive where it’s going to support the  sectors, very important sectors, the growers, the producers, tourism, mining industry the  list goes on.  We have said all the way along that we want to consult.  Which we have  been doing with the sector, and then we will reach a conclusion that is in the best interests  of the sectors involved, and the Australian economy and making sure our reputation as a  good place to come and work and visit is uphold.   

 JOURNALIST:  So you don’t have a particular number?   

 POLLEY:  We haven’t arrived at a number.  But as I said through the hearing today 19  per cent is not acceptable to the sector.  If there is somewhere between 10 and 15 it could  be around 13 per cent but we are ready to sit down as long as the Government is ready  to come to the table and be realistic and be prepared to meet us half way.   

 JOURNALIST:  What’s your hope for the outcome from today’s hearing?   

 POLLEY:  I hope that it convinces those Senators from the Government that they need  to go back into their party room and put a very strong determined argument to protect  Tasmanians interests.   

 JOURNALIST: Thank you very much Helen.   

 

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: ELLIOTT BELL 0427 916 491   

