---
title: "Transcript of press conference: Sydney: 9 march 2016: Australian Border Force's offensive comments, Cambodian refugee plan; Labor's humane approach to asylum seekers"
date: "2016-03-09"
creators:
  - "Marles, Richard"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
  - "Australian Border Force's offensive comments, Cambodian refugee plan"
  - "Labor's humane approach to asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/225061495
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4420783%22
---

 

 THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION   MEMBER FOR CORIO   

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  SYDNEY  WEDNESDAY, 9 MARCH 2016   

 SUBJECT/S: Australian Border Force’s offensive comments, Cambodian refugee  plan; Labor’s humane approach to asylum seekers.   

 RICHARD MARLES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION: Labor has always based our criticisms of the Government’s handling of  offshore processing in fact. The decision to keep people in tents on Nauru was an  outrage and we criticised that. For far too, long we had a substandard medical facility on  Manus Island which may well have cost a man his life and we criticised that very loudly  as well. But there have been many outlandish comments about the facilities on Manus  Island and Nauru, I’ve been to both of them and Labor has never engaged in that  hysteria. It is obviously wrong to make any comparison between the facilities on Manus  and Nauru with the concentration camps that were run by Nazi Germany.  To do so, is  not only offensive to those working in these Australian funded facilities but it is also  offensive to the memory of those who suffered and perished during the Holocaust. The  Secretary of the Department of Immigration is right in the comments that he made  yesterday when he said the policy can be debated but there should be no place for  falsehood, rumour and unfounded speculation. Mr Pezzullo is also right when he said  that official statements on this issue have to be precise and unambiguous and it’s in the  spirit of those comments that we are also deeply concerned by some of the other words  and language which was used in the Department of Immigration statement posted on its  website yesterday. To use the term allegedly in connection with the events that  occurred during Nazi Germany is deeply offensive. It is so important that the reality of  what occurred during the Nazi era is accepted so that this greatest documented evil of  humanity never happens again. To be sure, the German Government of today would  never imagine using the term allegedly in connection with the Nazi era.  Now I assume 

 this is a simple mistake, it is fair to say that in the new law enforcement culture of the  Department of Immigration, the term allegedly is often used as a bit of a comma. But  what has compounded a mistake and made it exponentially worse is the laboured  attempt by the Government last night to explain this language, to seek to place it in  context and to suggest that those who have raised concerns about it are engaging in  wilful mischief. This turns a simple mistake into a great error of judgement.    

 There is only one course now available to the Government, the Minister, not his  Department, but the Minister has to come out today and clearly withdraw these words  and apologise. The reputation of the Department is at stake, indeed the reputation of  Australia is at stake. We cannot see a repeat of Operation Fortitude when in the face of  Border Force bungling, we saw the Minister throw the Border Force Commander under  a bus while he himself went to the ground, not to appear for another three days. It was  not good enough then and it will not be good enough today. We need to hear, the  Minister for Immigration Peter Dutton come out today and unequivocally withdraw these  offensive words and accompany that with an unconditional apology.   

 Questions?    

 JOURNALIST: So you’re saying that there is no comparison then, you can’t make a  comparison why do you feel so strongly about that?     

 MARLES: Well of course to make any comparison between what is going on with our  facilities on Manus and Nauru with the concentration camps during the Nazi era is  ignorant, but it’s also deeply offensive, it is deeply offensive.   

 JOURNALIST: But why is it ignorant if you have a lack of transparency about what’s  happening at those centres, journalists still aren’t allowed to go to those centres, to see  what is happening for themselves, how is it so outrageous? And you know at the time in  Nazi Germany people couldn’t visit those centres either, although it was talked about  how horrendous those conditions are, journalists still cannot verify what is happening in  those centres. So how is it completely outrageous that that comparison is made?    

 MARLES: It is completely outrageous and the question needs to be thought about very  carefully. During the period of Nazi Germany, concentration camps were exterminating  people, that is obviously not what is going on here and therefore the language that  people need to use in this regard has to be very carefully thought through. It is  absolutely right to say that there is a lack of transparency in relation to these facilities  and Labor has been crying out for much greater transparency of these facilities and we  have been offering our own suggestions in relation to that such as independent  oversight that ought to be negotiated with the governments of Papua New Guinea and  Nauru, no question about that at all. But it is important that we do base our comments  here in fact and that we don’t walk down a hysterical road, but equally what we saw in  the comments that appear in the Government’s statement yesterday is the term  allegedly used in connection to the events of Nazi Germany. Now that is a gross error  and it’s an error which needs to be fixed and it needs to be fixed by the Minister today 

 because a failure to do so puts the whole reputation of the Department of Immigration at  risk. This is no small matter and as I said the government of Germany today would not  regard this as a small matter and it would never use language of this kind, this is an  issue which has to be fixed and it has to be fixed by the Minister himself today.    

 JOURNALIST: This is an election year, what would Labor’s policy be, how it is any  different to what the Liberal policy is?    

 MARLES:  The Labor policy in respect to offshore processing is very different, for  starters we would negotiate independent oversight in respect of both facilities. We  would want to make sure that there is transparency there, we would want to make sure  that these facilities operate at world’s best practice in terms of providing those within  them safe, dignified and humane refuge, but most significantly of all, we would seek to  negotiate immediately a credible third country resettlement option so we can get people  off Nauru and off Manus Island as soon as humanly possible. That’s what needs to  happen and that is the abject failure of the Government right now, and the news that we  have just heard that two more of those who have gone to Cambodia have been returned  to Iran, such that the Government has now spent $55 million in Cambodia building a  resettlement system for one person says everything about how this Government has  failed in building a third country resettlement. That is the ongoing answer to the question  of Nauru and Manus and that is the answer which this Government cannot get right.    

 JOURNALIST: So Labor are still looking to resettle asylum seekers in third countries or  other countries, what countries are on the top of your list?    

 MARLES: Well we are not in government so the ability to name, we are not in a position  to name countries, but what I can say is this, the difficulty that government have found  in trying to find third country resettlement options is the fact that it’s turned its back on  the global system of humanitarian affairs, from the very outset, it’s turned its back on the  UNHCR. You are not going to find a credible third country option unless you work with  the UNHCR, so if you’re asking me what as minister I would do immediately, it is to go  to the UNHCR, it is to make peace, it is to start participating as a fully engaged member  of the international community around the question of global humanitarian affairs and  establishing bona fides and then seeking to negotiate a credible third country option and  I believe that that would absolutely be available if the Government took that path, but  the tardiness of the Government in doing this is breathtaking.    

 JOURNALIST: There are not many third party options available in South East Asia,  there are not many refugee convention signatories or parties in this region, where else  would you be looking at?    

 MARLES: We live in a global community, we live in a global village; we take people as  refugees into this country from all over the world and so I don’t think it needs to be  limited to this region but what’s important is that we do this from the basis of being an  engaged member of the global community, not turning our back on the world at its most  significant moment of need since the Second World War and that is what we have seen 

 this Government do. So it shouldn’t therefore be surprised that the world is turning its  back on it, in terms of finding assistance to have a credible third country option.    

 JOURNALIST: Should Australia lift its humanitarian intake, would you still, you had  20,000 under the last Labor Government - should that be going to that number again or  even higher?    

 MARLES: Even higher and absolutely we should be doing that and last July at our  national conference we announced that a future Labor Government would double the  humanitarian intake over a period of ten years. But to give you a sense of why this  Government is seeing, so negative towards the global humanitarian effort today, on  coming to office, the first thing it did was to slash our humanitarian intake and then  announce to the UNHCR that it would make all its decision here in Canberra and not  take any account of what the global body responsible for this issue was seeking to do.  Now that is a form of isolationism, that is turning your back on the world at its hour of  need and not surprisingly when it comes to offshore processing this Government is now  experiencing the world turning its back on it. That’s what needs to change the  Government needs to engage again and that’s what underpin the policies that we  announced last July in terms of increasing our contribution to the UNHCR, in terms of  increasing our humanitarian intake, in terms of playing a much greater leadership role  within South East Asia around humanitarian affairs. All of this is about a future Labor  Government ensuring that Australia plays its part and in the process, I think then can  legitimately seek assistance from overseas around a third country resettlement option  for these people but that must happen and it needs to happen from this Government as  a matter of urgency.    

 JOURNALIST: In terms of increasing transparency and making sure Australia is  complying with its obligations under international law, would Labor let media access  these offshore centres wherever they maybe?    

 MARLES: We believe there should be much greater transparency and media access is  unquestionably a part of that. Now obviously, these are facilities which operate in other  countries and so those countries need to have a say in this as well, but I have long  argued in this role and previously to the governments of both Nauru and PNG that they  would be well served by allowing greater Australian media access to their countries. We  would urge that again in Government and we would do everything within our power to  ensure that there is far greater transparency so that the Australia people can have a  sense of confidence that facilities which they fund are indeed providing safe, dignified  and humane refuge to those who are within them.    

 JOURNALIST: Would you move to change the laws that have been passed that ensure  that people who speak out, who work in those centres face criminal charges, would you  take those laws away?    

 MARLES: Well let’s be clear, our view is that any person who is involved in those  facilities, be they an employee of the Department of Immigration or indeed anyone 

 contracted to the Department of Immigration who sees any wrong doing whatsoever  should speak out about it. That is our view as to what should occur now, we moved a  private members bill to make it not just a right for people to speak out, but an obligation  that they speak out in circumstances where they see any evidence whatsoever of child  abuse. Now our view is that the current Australian Border Force legislation does provide  whistle blower protection for all of those persons engaged in those facilities, but the  Government ought to be making that point clear now and the Government needs to be  out there making clear right now that those people who are working for its Department  or contracting to it, not only have a right, but really have an obligation to speak out when  they see wrong.  

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LIDIJA IVANOVSKI 0427 051 563   

 

 

