---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Gold Coast: 30 October 2016: tragic events this week in QLD; the Government's attacks on working families; paid parental leave; the Nationals taking tobacco donations; asylum seekers"
date: "2016-10-30"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "tragic events this week in QLD"
  - "the Government's attacks on working families"
  - "paid parental leave"
  - "the Nationals taking tobacco donations"
  - "asylum seekers"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/236342315
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4907582%22
---

 

 

 THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN 

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  GOLD COAST   SUNDAY, 30 OCTOBER 2016    

 SUBJECTS: Tragic events this week in QLD; the Government's attacks on  working families; paid parental leave; the Nationals taking tobacco donations;  asylum seekers.    

 TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Well thanks very  much for coming out this morning, it's a great pleasure to be here at Queensland  Labor's State Conference.  Last week was a really pretty tough week for Queensland  with the terrible tragedy at Dreamworld and more recently, later in the week, the  shocking attack on a Queensland bus driver, so I just really did want to start by  expressing my sympathies once again to all of those affected. I know that it is  heartbreaking for Queenslanders to have gone through two such unexpected  tragedies so close together.    

 It's terrific to be at the Conference and I'll be speaking in a little while about some of  the issues that Federal Labor and Queensland Labor together can work on  progressing, but I just wanted to make a couple of comments today about some of  the things that are running in the newspapers.      

 We see again an extraordinary attack on ordinary working families. The Federal  Government has a $30,000 hole in its calculations on whether people are better off  working or not if they are raising a family.  It is pretty extraordinary to be $30,000 out  in their calculations but we know what the Government is all about is softening up  Australians for attacks on ordinary working families. We’ve got this one example of  people who are, you know, are they better off on welfare or working if they are  raising a family. The Government has made a $30,000 mistake in that calculation.  This is all about softening people up for more cuts on people who are struggling to  raise a family. But it is not just that. There is another story today about the fact that  the Government's funded nanny scheme has, instead of helping 10,000 families,  helped fewer than 200 families. This is an absolutely massive flop at the same time 

 as the Government's proposing child care changes that will disadvantage hundreds  of thousands of Australian families.     

 We have got the continued attack on paid parental leave: this is a hard fought, hard  won workplace entitlement that Australian working women should be able to rely on  and instead you have a Government that wants to rob new mothers and their babies  of those crucial early weeks and months together.  You take all of these things  together and look at the attacks on mothers and their children, families just trying to  get by; at the same time, in the background we have Joe Hockey - who is the guy  who came up with the "lifters and leaners" expression, the guy who came up with  calling new mothers "double dippers"  -  he's in Washington on a big fat salary billing  taxpayers for his childcare costs. Really quite extraordinary how out of touch this  Liberal-National Government is with ordinary families and what it takes to raise  children. And that is even before you start talking about the cuts to health and  education.      

 I also wanted to say a few things about the story today that we've got a Nationals  Assistant Minister out saying he is uncomfortable with the Nationals taking tobacco  donations. Now I'm delighted that he has had the courage to stand up on this issue.  David Gillespie - a health practitioner in his past life, knows the harm that tobacco  does. This is the only product that if taken as intended will kill half of its regular  users. Given that, it's extraordinary that the National Party continue to take money  from the pushers of these products. And just incidentally it's extraordinary too that  our Prime Minister continues to have investments in funds that have tobacco  interests. Any questions?    

 JOURNALIST:  Back to the paid parental leave, the Xenophon Team now look set to  block this, after Nick Xenophon was reminded that he had promised not to touch it at  all. Is this a win for mothers?    

 PLIBERSEK:  Well anything that stops new mothers being robbed by up to $12,000  by Malcolm Turnbull is a win. These are women who have just had a baby: it is a  physically and emotionally tough time. The idea that new mothers should have to  rush back to work sooner than they're ready is just incredible. We know that  establishing breast feeding is very good for mothers and babies but we know that a  lot of families feel financial pressure. That is why we introduced paid parental leave  in the first place. The median income of women who would miss out under this  proposal is $43,000 a year - you are talking about women who work at Coles or  Woolies, teachers, nurses, missing out on paid parental leave because they have  negotiated in their enterprise bargain paid parental leave.  What we will see is  employers just dropping workplace paid parental leave because they will say, “well  you can get it from us or you can get it from the Government, you may as well get it  from the Government”, and the truth is that up to 80,000 women will be worse off by  up to $12,000 if Malcolm Turnbull gets his way.     

 JOURNALIST: These reports about a Bill to deal with asylum seekers accessing  Australian visas, is that a significant departure from what the Government's been  saying already? Should we have expected that based on their rhetoric to do with  resettling asylum seekers?    

 PLIBERSEK: Obviously we haven't seen the legislation so it's difficult to comment in  detail. What I would say is that it is a distraction from Peter Dutton's hopeless  mismanagement of his portfolio. It is extraordinary that three years on this  Government has not found third countries to resettle those people who are in limbo  on Manus Island and Nauru. It is time Peter Dutton started doing his job and finding  a permanent resettlement option for these people left in limbo.      

 JOURNALIST: What kind of a message do you think it would send to other countries  if we did set down that position in legislation?    

 PLIBERSEK: Look I think it's a bit too early to speculate about something that has  been done by press release by Peter Dutton, so I'll leave that for another day. I think  it would be about time though that Peter Dutton explained what he is going to do for  those people who are still on Manus Island and Nauru in terms of resettlement. We  know that processing times have blown out extraordinarily under this Government.  It  would be really good if he focussed on doing the job in front of him. Thank you very  much everyone.     

 

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350    

