---
title: "Reports reveal Dutton's dysfunction in immigration"
date: "2016-09-19"
creators:
  - "Neumann, Shayne"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/234299304
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4827349%22
---

 

 THE HON SHAYNE NEUMANN  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR 

 

 REPORTS REVEAL  DUTTON’S DYSFUNCTION IN IMMIGRATION    

 As Immigration Minister Peter Dutton lectures the rest of the world in New York this  week, two independent reports have revealed cost blowouts and mismanagement of  offshore processing centres under his watch.     

 This is on top of the Turnbull Government failing to secure durable and credible third  country resettlement arrangements for refugees and asylum seekers living in  offshore processing centres.    

 The Australian National Audit Office Auditor-General’s report - Offshore processing  centres in Nauru and Papua New Guinea: Procurement of garrison support and  welfare services - is littered with instances of errors and negligence by former  Immigration Minister Scott Morrison and Minister Dutton, and highlights the  dysfunction at the core of the Turnbull Government.    

 The ANAO report found that on the consolidation of contracts in Nauru and on  Manus Island in 2013-14, under the Coalition Government:    

 “In seeking advice from Finance, the unit made written statements  implying underperformance by service providers which was not  supported by the evidence.  The department subsequently referenced  Finance’s support in briefings for its Minister.” ANAO Report, page 47.    

 “There is no available record of specific conflict of interest declarations  having been made by departmental officers who were responsible for  the procurement.” ANAO Report, page 57.    

 “There is also no available documentation to indicate whether the  department performed due diligence checks on the successful tenderer  (Transfield) or its subcontractors as part of the contract consolidation.”  ANAO Report, page 57.    

 “Finance advised the ANAO that under the consolidated contract, the  per person per annum cost of holding a person in the offshore  processing centres in Nauru and on Manus Island, was estimated at 

 $573,111 at the time of the Mid-year Economic and Fiscal Outlook  2015-16.  Prior to consolidation Finance estimated the cost at  $201,000.” ANAO Report, page 58.    

 Another independent report commissioned by the department details a lack of  professionalism, systemic shortfalls, and a blindness to the risk of corruption in  decision making by Peter Dutton’s own department.     

 The RAND Corporation’s Assessment of the Consolidation of the ACBPS with the  DIBP report found:    

 “Systemic shortfalls were observed in the operations of the Customs  and Immigration organisations individually…” RAND Report, page 5.    

 “…the awareness of corruption risks in that organisation [Immigration]  was extremely low and largely limited to overseas operations.  This  resulted in blindness and a less-than-robust response to the risks of  corruption in immigration decision making.” RAND Report, page 22.    

 “Clearly, deficiencies in training, learning, and development were well  understood.” RAND Report, page 32.     

 Labor believes the Australian public deserve better than a tick-and-flick Minister who  isn’t across his brief and doesn’t ask his Department the hard questions.    

 MONDAY, 19 SEPTEMBER 2016    

 MEDIA CONTACT: MELISSA HOCKEY 0418 511 529   

 

