---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Newcastle, NSW: 2 November 2016: school funding; $100,000 university degrees; Higher Education Participation Program; Senator Bob Day; the Government's proposed changes to the Migration Act"
date: "2016-11-02"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
  - "Mcmillen, Caroline"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION"
subjects:
  - "school funding"
  - "$100,000 university degrees"
  - "Higher Education Participation Program"
  - "Senator Bob Day"
  - "the Government's proposed changes to the Migration Act"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/236436799
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4911087%22
---

 

 THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN 

 

 SHARON CLAYDON MP  MEMBER FOR NEWCASTLE   

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  NEWCASTLE  WEDNESDAY, 2 NOVEMBER 2016 

 SUBJECTS: School funding; $100,000 university degrees; Higher Education  Participation Program; Senator Bob Day; the Government’s proposed changes to  the Migration Act 

 

 PROF. CAROLINE MCMILLEN, VICE CHANCELLOR, UNIVERSITY OF  NEWCASTLE: It's wonderful to welcome the Shadow Minister for Education and of  course our local Member for Newcastle here today, on a glorious day at the Wollotuka  Institute, the home of our indigenous education and research, where some 1000  students across our university - indigenous students across the university - can gain  support of academics and non-academics for their studies. The university is very proud  of our equity and excellence, our mission, and it's a great opportunity to discuss today  those factors that are so important. To have equity of access to higher education for all  Australians, no matter their background, and ensure importantly, that we'll deliver equity  of success with those students. So it's been wonderful to have that discussion, a broad-ranging discussion, on the importance of equity and how we can continue to support  equity in universities, to support the economic transition of Australia. Thank you very  much.  

 SHARON CLAYDON, MEMBER FOR NEWCASTLE: Thank you, and it's always terrific  to welcome Tanya Plibersek to Newcastle. She's of course no stranger to our city but in  her new portfolio area as Shadow Minister for Education it's terrific to have her here at  the University of Newcastle, which of course, as the Vice-Chancellor made clear, it's  guiding principles are around delivering both equity and excellence in the field of higher 

 education. And perhaps no place better than the Wollotuka Institute to see those  guiding principles in practice. This university is leading not just our nation in the area of  higher education for indigenous students but is an international leader. We have, as  mentioned, 1045 indigenous students now enrolled at the University of Newcastle - that  is by far the largest number in the nation. This doesn't happen by chance, this is off the  back of 30 years of experience and building and hard work in making sure that  indigenous students get access to quality education, but are also supported throughout  that journey, are studying in disciplines across all the fields and now we are in the  position of having trained more than 50 percent of this nation's indigenous doctors and  surgeons now. That's a terrific accolade for this university. One of the many highlights in  terms of the university leading the way in delivering both quality and excellence and  ensuring that there is good access for people from all walks of life. Our region - we have  a higher than average number of students from low SES backgrounds - it's important  that universities open their arms to students who often - more than 30 percent of  students here now -  are the first students in their families to go to university. So they  are things that I, as the Member for Newcastle, I am enormously proud of and of course  are important influences for policy makers and for Labor policy, in particular. I'd like to  hand over to Tanya Plibersek now, to talk us through some of the things that we've  been dealing with here this morning. Welcome Tanya.  

 TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks very much,  Sharon. It's such a pleasure to be here with Sharon Claydon, and I'm grateful to the  Vice-Chancellor and to the university staff for the very warm welcome we've received  this morning. I also will be meeting later with Meryl Swanson from the neighbouring  electorate, she's a big part of the rest of the series of meetings that we have here at the  university, and later today we will also be visiting a primary school.  It's very important to  notice that this electorate, Sharon's electorate, will miss out on $33 million for the final 2  years of needs-based funding under the Gonski school education funding model. And I'll  have the opportunity to meet with local parents, teachers and children later today to talk  about needs-based funding for schools and what a difference it's made to local schools.  

 Now on the University of Newcastle, and what a pleasure it is to be at the Wollotuka  Institute here. This is an institute that has an international reputation for its wonderful  support for indigenous students, making sure not just that more indigenous students  start university, but they get the support they need through their university education to  complete the courses that they've selected. You see high achievers in every field at the  University of Newcastle coming from an indigenous background. High achievers that  have international success studying at universities not just in Australia, but doing post-graduate work overseas in some of the best universities in the world. It all starts here.  And it starts with an attitude that any Australian who is prepared to study hard and work  hard deserves the ability to get a great education without a $100,000 debt hanging  around their neck. Labor will never support $100,000 university degrees because we  know that there is talent, the ability to work hard, intellectual capacity to study at  university right throughout our Australian population. What is lacking in some areas is  the confidence to take on those very large debts that the Liberals have loaded up  students with. We don't want to see ambitious people turned away because they can't  afford a $100,000 university degree.  

 This university right now has 1045 indigenous students. That's a fantastic record, but of  course, across our university sector we still want to see more indigenous Australians  taking on tertiary education. Uncapping student places - the policy that Labor introduced 

 - has seen 190,000 extra students in our universities, and a 26 percent increase in the  number of indigenous students. As well, we've seen a 30 percent increase in the  number of students from a regional background, and about 36,000 extra students from  a low SES background. We know that our talents, our capacities, reach in to every  Australian community, and we want to make sure that people who have the desire, have  the work ethic, can get to university without being loaded up with those terrible  $100,000 degrees.  

 We've seen in higher education more than 25 reports, investigations; we now see a  government that has moved universities into one-year funding agreements because  they know that they will never get their $100,000 university degrees through the Senate.  The university sector needs certainty, it needs a decent level of funding, and it needs a  continued commitment to ensure that every Australian who has got the determination to  go to university can afford to go to university. What we don't need is Simon Birmingham  putting universities on one-year contracts, cutting the Higher Education Participation  program - one of the main supports of getting indigenous students and other students  from low SES backgrounds into university - cutting that HEP program by 40 percent.  And what we certainly don't need is another review, as the Minister has announced. And  we don't need Christopher Pyne's $10 million advertising campaign when he was  Education Minister - we found out in Senate Estimates last sitting week that Christopher  Pyne's department knew that his $10 million higher education advertising campaign was  built on a lie. It was built on a lie that students would pay only 50 percent of their  university costs, when in fact the figure is much closer to 60 percent under the  Government's proposals. Any questions?  

 JOURNALIST: Some recent Closing the Gap figures, I consider, I guess in terms of  indigenous education and benchmarks that were set many years ago. How concerning  is that for you, and what more can be done in this area?  What do you think needs to be  the first priority?  

  PLIBERSEK: The Closing the Gap education targets are very, very important. We  know that a great education is the key to economic independence for indigenous  Australians, but it's also linked with better health outcomes, and a range of other  positive outcomes for indigenous Australians. It starts with pre-school. It starts with early  learning. It starts with supporting parents to be their children's first educator. We've  seen cuts proposed by this Government that would threaten pre-school programs,  would threaten early learning for indigenous children. We know that the Gonski needs-based funding system specifically recognises indigeneity in the funding model, that  would allow much better education, much more targeted, one-on-one support. If this  Government does not commit to years 5 and 6 of extra needs-based funding they're not  just robbing the electorate of Newcastle of $33 million, they're robbing children in every  school in every part of Australia of decent funding that can help them achieve their  potential.  

 We've seen cuts to vocational education too - $2.75 billion cut from TAFE and  apprenticeships and so on. So we've got 130,000 fewer apprentices today than when  the Liberals first came to government, and we've seen cuts to programs like the Higher  Education Participation program that, of course again, is disadvantaging indigenous  students. So if you're talking about closing the gap - properly funding our pre-schools,  our schools, our TAFE, and our universities are absolutely critical. They're critical for 

 any person, any Australian, to get the head start they need to lift themselves out of  disadvantage. They're the key to getting a decent job in the future.  

 And I'll tell you something else: this isn't just important for individuals - it's important for  us as a nation. If we really want to be a strong and growing first-world economy, we  have to invest in education. The government says we can't afford to invest in education,  but they're prepared to give a $50 billion tax cut to big business. Most of that tax cut  goes to overseas shareholders. Most Australian economists say we would be better off  spending money to properly fund our education system - not just better for individuals,  better for our Australian economy.  

 JOURNALIST: In terms of the HEP, you say that Newcastle Uni has the highest  number of enrolments of indigenous people. How big of an influence was that in terms  of boosting those figures (inaudible)? 

 PLIBERSEK: Well we were talking to some of the staff here who were talking about  their program with high schools and making sure that the university goes into the high  schools, but also that high school students, their parents and teachers, are able to come  to the university. But you can't do that for free. HEP has funded programs like that right  across Australia. Universities reaching into schools where there are a high number of  students who haven't got a family background of tertiary education, and opening their  eyes to the possibility of a university education, giving them the knowledge that they can  go to university, that these are the options for them, that these are the sort of supports  that would be available. Opening their eyes to the hundreds of different courses that  might be suitable and interesting for them. The HEP program has been an absolutely  critical factor in the achievements we've seen of increasing indigenous participation,  increasing participation of regional students, and increasing the participation of students  who are the first in their family to go to university.  

 JOURNALIST: There is obviously some really good work that’s happening at this  university through the Wollotuka Institute. Do you take this to other universities across  the country? Do you use this as an example when you're speaking with leaders of other  tertiary institutions?  

 PLIBERSEK: Absolutely. I think if Newcastle University can achieve these great results,  then other universities can too, and it's important that universities continue to learn from  each other. I know that Wollotuka has a big influence not just nationally around  Australia, but internationally as well. It is recognised as a leader in its field  internationally, and I think that's a great thing for Newcastle.   

 JOURNALIST: Just on the issue of Bob Day, Ms Plibersek. Do you believe the  Government has acted in the interests of probity and standards by throwing the book at  Senator Bob Day? 

 PLIBERSEK: I don't know that the Government has thrown the book at Senator Day -  they've been accepting his vote for as long as they possibly could. It seems [inaudible]  that the Government may have been accepting Bob Day's vote even when they were  questioning whether he was properly elected to the Senate. Now we see emerging  information that the Solicitor-General, Justin Gleeson, was asked to provide information  on the composition on the Senate - we don't know whether that's about Bob Day or  whether it’s about something else. But it seems, once again, that the Prime Minister and 

 the Attorney General have landed themselves in a big fat mess because they have  wanted to take the vote of someone who maybe was not properly elected to the Senate.  There is just story after story now, making it apparent that it is not appropriate to accept  this Senator's vote on critical legislation. I'm very pleased that former Senator Day won't  be around to vote on the Australian Building and Construction Commission legislation,  or on the marriage equality plebiscite legislation. But the additional information that has  emerged about the rental payments on a building that may have been owned by former  Senator Day - the tax payer paying rent for offices that were in that building - I mean this  all stinks - and the real question is how long has the Government known? Have they  been accepting a tainted vote because they were so desperate that they were prepared  to do anything to get their dodgy legislation through a hostile Senate? 

 JOURNALIST: Why was Labor maintaining as recently as last weekend that the  Coalition was inappropriately seeking to keep Bob Day in the Senate for his vote, and it  turns out that they were actually doing the opposite, and they were taking steps to have  him disqualified?  

 PLIBERSEK: Were they really? I mean, this is a very interesting question and it goes to  the heart of who knew what when? Has the Government really known for weeks that  Bob Day's vote was tainted? That he wasn't properly elected to the Senate? If that's the  case, they should have been frank with the Australian people much earlier than they  have been. If they've been accepting a tainted vote for weeks, I think the Prime Minister  and the Attorney General in particular have a lot to answer for.  

 JOURNALIST: If they were taking steps to have him disqualified, is that embarrassing  for Labor to have got that story completely wrong? 

 PLIBERSEK: I think that is an extraordinary proposition. They've been accepting this  guy's vote for weeks now, having perhaps known that he was not properly elected to the  Senate. I think it's for the Government to answer what they knew and when, and why  they were prepared to accept a tainted vote.  

 JOURNALIST: On Kevin Rudd's opinion piece that he's written. Do you think it's bit rich  of Mr Rudd to complain about the Government's Migration Acts's changes, when  actually the Government is dealing with a problem that Mr Rudd created in offshore  detention when he was in government? 

 PLIBERSEK: Well, really. I mean how long can the Government keep pointing the  finger at the guys who were in charge before? We're three years into a new government  now, and every time anything gets a little bit difficult the Government says it's someone  else's fault. Wouldn't it be terrific if Malcolm Turnbull was actually in charge of  something, and actually could deliver what he says he wants to deliver. I think it's very  important to acknowledge that yes, offshore processing did start under Labor, but never  with the intention that there would be indefinite detention on Manus Island and Nauru. It  is unacceptable that people have been there now for more than three years. Peter  Dutton has completely dropped the ball. The Government has completely dropped the  ball on resettlement. Resettlement should have been a priority of this Government from  day one, and we've seen no progress on this critical issue.  

 JOURNALIST: So if the lifelong visa ban that the Government is proposing is a  precondition for the removal of refugees from Nauru and Manus Island, why wouldn't  Labor support that? 

 PLIBERSEK: Well, again, what a proposition from the Government - that Labor should  vote sight unseen on legislation that not even government ministers can explain. We've  got an Immigration Minister that says it does one thing; we've got a Health Minister that  says it does something else; we've got a Foreign Minister that says it does something  else. First of all, we had the first Treasury bill of the year introduced with a $107 million  black hole. We've got immigration legislation that three key ministers in the Government  can't agree on, we've not seen the legislation, you'll excuse me for being a little bit  sceptical and saying let's wait and see what this legislation actually proposes. But I  would say, in a more general sense, this is a distraction that Peter Dutton wants  because he wants to distract attention from the fact that he has failed - comprehensively  failed - to find a resettlement option for the people on Manus Island and Nauru. And,  frankly, if what Peter Dutton says about the magnificent success he's been as an  Immigration Minister - he says he stopped the boats - well if he has, then you don't need  this legislation, it's pointless. Thirdly I'd say this looks like more than anything else to me  is Peter Dutton's job application for the leadership of the Liberal Party, and Malcolm  Turnbull too weak to say no to him.  

 JOURNALIST: Wouldn't Labor be at risk of being seen to be prolonging indefinite  settlements on the island by not supporting the visa ban? 

  PLIBERSEK: I just don't know how anyone can draw conclusions about legislation that  is not available for people to read now. We're being asked to comment on legislation  that we haven't seen. You as journalists are being asked to draw conclusions about the  effect of this legislation without ever seeing it. If this is about resettlement, why doesn't  the Government say so? It is an absurd proposition that any Australian should be asked  to make up their mind about something based on a story on the front page of a  newspaper and no other information besides that. We've seen legislation after  legislation introduced by this Government with big holes in it - the $107 million black  hole in the omnibus savings bill is just one example. This is a government that has  voted to condemn itself in the House of Representatives. It's a government that has lost  control on the floor of the House of Representatives because people can't be bothered  turning up to do their day job. This is a shambles. And we're not going to respond to  every newspaper story they put into the newspapers. We will look at legislation, we will  read it, we will discuss it, we will go through our Shadow Cabinet, we will go through our  Caucus processes, and then we'll give you an answer. It is unreasonable for anyone to  say that Labor should give a firm answer on legislation we have never seen. If the  Government was serious about this, they'd show us the legislation, they'd negotiate with  us - there's none of that. This is another stunt from a minister desperate to distract  people from the fact that he has failed to find third country resettlement for the people  on Manus Island and Nauru. And it's a desperate effort by Peter Dutton to big note  himself, I guess because of the internal workings of the Liberal Party he might think he's  got some chance of knocking off Malcolm Turnbull.  

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350   

