---
title: "Budget 2016: 2016 Foreign Affairs Budget"
date: "2016-05-03"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/227526456
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4540866%22
---

  MEDIA RELEASE 

  MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  The Hon Julie Bishop MP 

  3 May 2016 

  2016 FOREIGN AFFAIRS BUDGET 

  The 2016 Budget continues the Turnbull Government's commitment to strengthening  Australia's national security, promoting economic prosperity and helping our economy  transition to create jobs. 

  The Turnbull Government will deliver a further $9.2 million to maintain the Department  of Foreign Affairs and Trade's People Smuggling and Human Trafficking Taskforce. 

  The Taskforce plays a critical role in promoting effective and practical international  cooperation to support the Turnbull Government's efforts to combat people smuggling  and human trafficking. 

  The Budget also provides $2.7 million to establish Australia's first Cyber Ambassador,  as part of the Turnbull Government's response to cyber security threats. 

  Australia's Cyber Ambassador will promote our position on internet governance and  cyber security. The Turnbull Government will also establish a $4 million cyber  cooperation program to improve cyber security in the Indo-Pacific region. 

  The Turnbull Government will also commit $39.4 million to open two new overseas  consulates, in consultation with host governments, in China and in Lae in Papua New  Guinea as part of our 'economic diplomacy' agenda. 

  The new post in China will promote the Turnbull Government's national economic plan  for growth and jobs following ratification of the China-Australia Free Trade Agreement. 

  A new Consulate-General in China will assist Australian businesses to expand  commercial opportunities in the food, agriculture, clean technology and education  sectors. 

  The Consulate-General in Lae, which I announced at the recent Australia-PNG  Ministerial Forum, will help bolster our growing bilateral trade and investment  relationship with PNG and facilitate delivery of Australia's $477.3 million aid  investment. 

  MEDIA RELEASE 

  Lae is PNG's commercial capital, home of its largest port and the gateway connecting  PNG's island regions and the highlands where the majority of Papua New Guineans  live. 

  Australia will also provide an estimated $3.8 billion in total Official Development  Assistance (ODA) in 2016-1 7, making us approximately the 12th largest donor in the  Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). The aid program  will continue to focus on the Indo-Pacific region. 

  The Budget highlights Australia's ongoing commitment to humanitarian assistance.  Australia will increase the Emergency Fund to $130 million in 2016-17, to enable  timely and effective responses to disasters and other humanitarian crises. 

  The Turnbull Government will provide a further $220 million over the next three years  to address the humanitarian and longer-term resilience needs in Syria and  neighbouring countries hosting large numbers of refugees. Australia's humanitarian  response to the Syrian crisis amounts to $213 million since 201 1. 

  The Budget includes over $100 million for gender equality programs and for the  innovationxchange, which is delivering solutions to complex development challenges  in the Indo-Pacific region. 

  In 2016-17, Australia will also invest $200 million to support our five-year $1 billion  commitment to addressing climate change. This will support developing countries to  build climate resilience and reduce emissions. 

  The Turnbull Government is committed to protecting our national interests, contributing  to regional and global stability, security and prosperity, and strengthening our  engagement in the Indo-Pacific region. 

  Foreign Minister's Office: Rachel Obradovic 0478 488 874  Phoebe Nolan 0408 275 340 

