---
title: "Ambassador to Jordan"
date: "2016-05-04"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/227526397
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4543024%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon Julie Bishop MP 

 

 4 May 2016 

 AMBASSADOR TO JORDAN   

 Today I announce the appointment of Mr Miles Armitage as Australia's next Ambassador  to the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. 

 Australia and Jordan enjoy a history of friendship and cooperation dating back to the First  World War, where Australians served in the region as part of the Allied forces. Since  establishing diplomatic relations in 1975, Australia’s relationship with Jordan has grown to  include education, defence and cultural cooperation. 

 As a neighbour to the conflicts in Syria and Iraq, Jordan hosts a large refugee population.  Since 2011, Australia has provided $258 million in response to these humanitarian crises,  with around $126 million of this supporting refugees and their host communities in  neighbouring countries, including Jordan. This year, Australia has provided $25 million in  humanitarian assistance and we are developing a multi-year assistance package to  strengthen Jordan’s capacity to continue hosting large numbers of refugees. 

 The crises in Syria and Iraq have brought Australia and Jordan closer together. We have  increased our counter-terrorism cooperation to address the rise of Daesh, and in the  United Nations Security Council we have co-authored resolutions to address the  humanitarian crisis.  

 Mr Armitage is a senior career officer with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade  and is currently Ambassador for Counter-Terrorism, a position he has held since May  2014. He has previously served as Ambassador to Timor-Leste, with earlier postings to  Manila, New York and Islamabad. 

 In Canberra, Mr Armitage has served as Assistant Secretary of the Parliamentary and  Media Branch, and the Maritime South East Asia Branch. He has also been seconded to  the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet where he served as Assistant Secretary of  the Americas, Asia and Trade Branch.  

 Mr Armitage has a Bachelor of Arts (Hons) degree and a Diploma of Museum Studies  from the University of Sydney, and a Graduate Diploma of Foreign Affairs and Trade from  the Australian National University. 

 Mr Armitage is expected to take up his appointment in July. I thank outgoing Ambassador  Heidi Venamore PSM for her significant contribution to advancing Australia’s interests in  Jordan since 2012.   

 Foreign Minister’s Office:  Rachel Obradovic 0478 488 874  Phoebe Nolan 0408 275 340   

