---
title: "Government admits refugee laws aren't ready"
date: "2016-11-04"
creators:
  - "Neumann, Shayne"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/236590159
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4914734%22
---

 

 SHAYNE NEUMANN MP 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR 

 

 GOVERNMENT ADMITS REFUGEE LAWS AREN’T READY   

 In an extraordinary admission on the Today Show this morning, Christopher Pyne has  thrown Peter Dutton under the bus by admitting legislation to enforce a lifetime ban on  some refugees ever visiting Australia isn’t ready.   

 The Turnbull Government began the week on Sunday saying this legislation was critical,  but now it’s Friday and we find they haven’t even written it.   

 Christopher Pyne was asked when the legislation would be released and he replied:   

 “As soon as it’s ready to be introduced because it’s pretty straight forward.”   

 Labor wrote to Immigration Minister Peter Dutton on Monday asking for a copy of the  Bill so we could consider the detail but were told to wait until next week; and now we  find out it’s because they still haven’t written the legislation.   

 This is yet another example of the chaos and division that has beset this government -  another trademark Turnbull Government stuff up.  

 The Turnbull Government has shown it’s happy to suck up to One Nation and appease  extremists in their party; but when it comes to doing the work, they fall over.   

 Time is running out for Peter Dutton.  He’s not known for being across the detail in his  portfolio and Australia needs better than a tick-and-flick Immigration Minister.   

 Labor has said from the start it seems ridiculous that genuine refugees who settle in  another country and become citizens of that country would be banned from ever visiting  Australia as a tourist or on business 40 years down the track.   

 Labor will look closely at the legislation when the Turnbull Government finally releases it  and take it through our usual processes.   

 Refugees on Manus Island and Nauru have been there too long.  Rather than spending  the week changing his story and trying to muddy the water, Peter Dutton should have  secured durable third country resettlement options for these people.   

 No amount of distraction or internal chaos will distract from the Turnbull Government’s  total failure to secure durable third country resettlement options for refugees on Manus  Island and Nauru.   

 FRIDAY, 4 NOVEMBER 2016   

 MEDIA CONTACT: MEL HOCKEY 0418 511 529   

 

