---
title: "Decision to leave federal parliament at the next election"
date: "2016-01-22"
creators:
  - "Parke, Melissa"
source: "Office of PARKE, MELISSA, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/223056656
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4319918%22
---

 

 THE HON MELISSA PARKE MP  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR FREMANTLE 

 DECISION TO LEAVE FEDERAL PARLIAMENT AT THE NEXT ELECTION    

 After careful consideration I have decided that I will not contest the federal seat of  Fremantle for a fourth term at the next election.      

 It is time for me to be closer to my family and to travel less.  For 8 years I worked  overseas for the United Nations, and it will be nearly 9 years that I have been in  parliament, crisscrossing this amazing continent to represent the incredible  community of Fremantle at the national level.     

 I deeply respect the passion and values demonstrated daily by my constituents and  the support they offer me. However, I believe that renewal is a good tonic for our  democracy - my departure will be to the benefit of Fremantle and to the parliament,  as every new member brings unique experiences, insights, fresh energy and  perspective to the role.    

 My commitment to advancing the causes of human rights, animal welfare, the  environment, public health and education, science and the arts, to addressing  extreme poverty, disadvantage and injustice wherever it occurs, including with  regard to Australia's Indigenous peoples and refugees, and to promoting good  governance and accountability, is as strong as ever.     

 I look forward to new challenges in future—but will always remain engaged in  the causes I care most about.    

 Working for and with the greater Fremantle community (including the local  government areas of Fremantle, East Fremantle, Melville, and Cockburn) has been  a privilege, and I’m proud of our achievements together.  I have seen tremendous  positive change in local schools, sports, heritage and community infrastructure, in  the solar panels that glint upon thousands of rooftops, in the delivery of innovative  projects like wave-power and geothermal heating, and in forward-looking Labor  initiatives like NDIS, NBN and Gonski.     

 I was especially glad for the opportunity to work within the Labor government to  reduce homelessness and improve the provision of social and affordable housing; to  bring a national framework and funding to support mental healthcare; and to be the  first dedicated Minister in 25 years for Australia’s world-leading international  development agency, AusAID.  It was an honour to work with so many good people  on such important projects and reforms.    

 It has been just as special to be a member of the national parliament: to work with  parliamentary colleagues across the political spectrum over multiple terms on  parliamentary committees including treaties, foreign affairs, law enforcement  integrity, and human rights. I have enjoyed being chair of the Australian branch of  Parliamentarians for Global Action and co-chairing a number of parliamentary  friendship groups relating to the United Nations, UNICEF, ABC, the TPP, drug law  reform, and RSPCA Australia.    

 It has also been a pleasure to work with parliamentary colleagues, academics,  scientists, experts, industry, unions and community groups on issues such  as abolition of the death penalty, justice for refugees, nuclear disarmament, marine  sanctuaries, climate change, press freedom, fair trade, closing the gap, war powers  reform, Australian aid, early childhood education, public health, rare diseases,  medicinal cannabis, dying with dignity, support for veterans, whistle-blower  protection, an independent office of animal welfare, an end to gene patenting, and  long-overdue justice for the Palestinian, Tibetan, West Papuan and Rohingya  peoples.    

 The role of an informed and engaged backbencher is undervalued in the Australian  political system, which increasingly favours the executive over the parliament.  Receiving the triennial Award for Integrity as a parliamentarian from the  Accountability Round Table in December 2013 alongside Mark Dreyfus and Judi  Moylan was a particular honour.     

 It has been a humbling and galvanising experience to be part of effective local  community action in Fremantle through such events as Gimme Shelter (raising funds  and awareness for homelessness), and in local campaigns for more humane refugee  policy, climate action, renewable energy, Australian aid and marine sanctuaries, as  well as concerted community opposition to live export, supertrawlers, and the road  insanity that is the proposed Perth Freight Link (particularly the destructive and  pointless Roe 8 highway extension).     

 I want to thank the people of the Fremantle electorate for their support,  encouragement, and constructive criticism.    

 Finally, I thank the Australian Labor Party for the opportunity to represent Fremantle  and Labor in the parliament and Labor members for their sustained support. I  acknowledge and thank my staff, past and present, for their deep and abiding  commitment to working with me as servants of the Fremantle electorate and the  nation. I thank my Labor parliamentary colleagues, past and present, for their shared  work, debates, and good company.    

 I will continue to work for the election of a Bill Shorten-led Labor government as the  only guarantee of high-quality public health and education, fair and safe working  conditions, the delivery of the NBN and public transport infrastructure, increasing  Australian aid, and protection of the environment including meaningful action on  climate change.     

 FRIDAY, 22 JANUARY 2016   

