---
title: "The border and beyond Australia's 21st century border security system: speech at 13th National Security Annual Summit, Canberra"
date: "2016-05-11"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/227927582
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4558056%22
---

 1 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 

 

 

 

 

 The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection   

  SAFEGUARDING AUSTRALIA 2016 - PROTECTING THE HOMEFRONT 

 “THE BORDER AND BEYOND AUSTRALIA’S 21st CENTURY BORDER 

 SECURITY SYSTEM”  

 11 May 2016    

 <<<< CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY >>>> 

 

 Distinguished guests, good evening. 

 I thank Karl Mahoney for his introduction. 

 And I want to thank Professor Mendis for inviting me to speak with you 

 tonight about the challenges facing Australia’s border security. 

 I understand that you have had a day of productive discussions of the 

 critical challenges facing our nation’s security. 

 Just over three years ago, Australians were told that our security 

 environment had changed from that of the ‘9/11 decade’ 

 - that the threat of terrorism would be replaced by threats from 

 other states  

 - and that Australia's "principal national security focus" in future 

 would be on state players in our own region.1 

 

 1  http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/defence/julia-gillard-says-911-decade-is- over/story-e6frg8yo- 1226560445825 

 2 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 

 Then Prime Minister Julia Gillard made many pronouncements that 

 would be proved wrong. That was one of them. 

 Similarly, Labor was on the wrong side of history and our nation’s 

 security when it dismantled Howard-era defences against people 

 smugglers. 

 In the resulting chaos, more than 800 boats brought more than 50,000 

 people to our shores - and more than 1200 people lost their lives. 

 The nation’s Budget took an $11 billion hit as Labor scrambled to open 

 17 detention centres to detain illegal arrivals, including 8000 children.  

 At the same time, Labor cut 700 staff and $735 million from Customs, 

 despite persistent threats from organised criminals trafficking everything 

 from Ice to counterfeit goods.  

 Unsurprisingly then, Australians lost confidence in the integrity of our 

 borders and in our migration programme - a significant contributor to our 

 nation’s wealth and character over the past 70 years. 

 

 A STRONG BORDER MATTERS 

 A strong border is vital for any country that wants to maintain national 

 sovereignty, and deter transnational criminals and terrorists.  

 But our conception of what constitutes effective border security has 

 moved beyond the immigration line or territorial boundaries. 

 Given the trans-national nature of threats our nation faces, our approach 

 must encompass multiple lines of effort across a border continuum, 

 including 

 3 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 

 - … stronger measures, such as biometrics and other 

 technologies, at the border… 

 - …cooperation and action with our friends and allies beyond the 

 border… 

 - …and collaboration among our domestic agencies, with 

 businesses and with our community behind the border. 

 This approach is important to identifying and stopping threats… 

 - …and it also helps the passage of legitimate commerce and 

 passengers vital to our nation’s wealth. 

 Such effort, however, requires a well-resourced and coordinated plan. 

 

 OPERATION SOVEREIGN BORDERS 

 The Coalition came to office with a clear plan for our nation’s security 

 that has restored integrity to Australia’s borders. 

 Operation Sovereign Borders, the Government’s ADF-led, multi-agency 

 border security operation, has stopped the boats. 

 And that’s because of the simple premise of OSB:  that those attempting 

 to enter Australia illegally by boat will be stopped and turned back to 

 their country of departure, where it is safe to do so. 

 Since OSB began, 26 boats carrying 710 people have been turned back 

 and safely returned to their country of departure.  

 4 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 

 - it has now been more than 660 days since the last successful 

 people smuggling venture to our country.2  

 OSB has undermined the people smugglers’ business model, forcing 

 them to cut prices from $10,000 per voyage to as little as $1,000.3  

 - and even at that price, clients have been hard - albeit not 

 impossible - to find. 

 OSB has ended the deaths at sea, restored public confidence in our 

 maritime borders and, this in turn, as reported by the Scanlon 

 Foundation, has renewed support for our migration programme.   

 OSB is effective because it works across the border continuum: 

 - collaboration with source and transit countries has disrupted 

 ventures before they embark on dangerous journeys and 

 enabled safe returns; 

 - successful on-water operations have deterred new boats while 

 returning those foolish enough to try;  

 - and cooperation among domestic agencies has led to the 

 prosecution of people smugglers based in Australia - 18 people 

 are serving prison sentences in Australia for people smuggling 

 offences.  

 But the lesson of Labor in Government is that success cannot be taken 

 for granted and can be easily undone 

 - Indeed, we have seen some in Labor already tug at the loose 

 threads of Labor’s asylum policy. 

 

 2  

 http://www.peterdutton.com.au/MediaHub/MediaReleases/tabid/75/articleType/ArticleView/articleId/590/categ  oryId/5/Press-Conference-with-Major-General-Andrew-Bottrell-Commander-JATF.aspx  3  ABC reporting 24/3/14 

 5 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 

 We know there are some 14,000 people in Indonesia - and many more 

 beyond - that have not given up the hope of a boat journey to Australia. 

 We know people smugglers continue to ply their dangerous criminal 

 trade and are looking for the earliest sign that we might waiver - we 

 must not. 

 In recent months, our on-water posture has been reinforced to its 

 highest level since the beginning of OSB to deal with immediate and 

 enduring threats to our maritime security and sovereignty.  

 Australians can have confidence that a re-elected Coalition Government 

 will maintain the strong policies that keep the people smugglers at bay. 

 

 TACKLING TERRORISM 

 Ladies and gentlemen. 

 Far from facing the end of the terror threat, Australia - along with our 

 friends and allies - has been assaulted by terrorism. 

 As a liberal, tolerant and democratic society, Australia is a tempting 

 target for international and home-grown terrorists: 

 - ASIO is conducting more than 400 high priority investigations, a 

 number that has doubled since early 2014;  

 - it has identified around 190 people who are being investigated 

 for providing support to terrorist activities in Syria and Iraq;  

 - and we know some 110 Australians are fighting for or otherwise 

 supporting Daesh and other terrorist groups in Syria and Iraq. 

 6 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 

 Since 12 September 2014, when the national threat level was raised, 

 there have been 34 people charged as a result of 12 counter-terrorism 

 operations - more than one-third of all such charges since 2001. 

 Most troubling, the overwhelming majority are young men and women.  

 This speaks to the impact of the internet and other mass 

 communications technology on our security. 

 While these technologies enable business at long distance, and expose 

 people to new experiences and ideas, they also provide opportunities for 

 transnational crime, exploitation and radicalisation.  

 Rapidly developing technology - in particular encrypted communications 

 once the privilege of states - makes threats more difficult to counter.  

 And of course, modern terror has global reach:  young Australians can 

 be radicalised from afar and turned to home-grown terrorism or the ranks 

 of foreign fighters. 

 Where terrorists once took months to plan, train for and execute an 

 attack, they can now read an on-line manual and act catastrophically - 

 all while maintaining a very low profile. 

 - Regrettably, we have seen such attacks here and abroad. 

 We must also be concerned that Australians who join the fight could 

 seek to return with more lethal skills and deeper, more spiteful 

 convictions.   

 Between 1990 and 2010, 30 Australians travelled to Afghanistan and 

 Pakistan to train with extremists and terrorists. 

 7 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 

 - Of the 25 that returned, 19 have since engaged in activity of 

 security concern, with eight convicted and five still serving a 

 custodial sentence. 

 - So given the numbers involved in Syria and Iraq - and the 

 shear brutality of the conflict - there is good reason to be 

 concerned. 

 There can be no higher obligation on a Government than to keep its 

 citizens safe and secure. 

 The Coalition Government has invested more than $1.3 billion to support 

 counter-terrorism efforts, whereas Labor slashed $790 million.4 

 We have passed five tranches of legislation to strengthen our laws 

 against terrorism, whereas Labor did not pass one in six years in 

 Government. 

 The Australian Citizenship Act, for example, has been updated so that 

 terrorists who are dual nationals can be stripped of their citizenship. 

 - Last week I formally declared Islamic State a terrorist 

 organisation under the Act; 

 - and our agencies are working through the details of terrorist 

 suspects who might fall within the scope of the Act. 

 At the border, the Coalition has established Counter Terrorism Units to 

 deal with inbound and outbound national security risks, in particular 

 would-be foreign fighters. 

 Since their deployment in 2014, CTU teams at our major airports have 

 conducted over 20,000 patrols and almost 300,000 real time 

 

 4  in 2007-08 

 8 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 

 assessments, resulting in almost 300 positive national security related 

 outcomes.  

 Our work to keep Australians safe and secure will continue. 

 

 THE FUTURE OF BORDER SECURITY 

 Recent terrorist attacks in Paris and Brussels remind us that even 

 individuals from ‘friendly’ countries can pose significant security threats. 

 We need a robust visa framework based on the individual, regardless of 

 where they come from, to manage this risk from travellers. 

 We also need to ensure that legitimate travellers - as well as legitimate 

 commerce - are not impeded by our border processes. 

 To put this into context, this financial year alone, we have processed 

 more than 31 million air and sea passengers.  

 This is expected to grow to almost 40 million passengers per annum by 

 2018-19. 

 Similarly, air and sea cargo will rise 14 and 26 per cent, respectively, 

 over the four years between 2014-15 and 2018-19. 

 Given this strong growth, the Coalition has enhanced capabilities to 

 detect and counter criminals and terrorists, while streamlining processes 

 for legitimate travellers and trade. 

 We have integrated Immigration and Customs agencies, forging closer 

 cooperation between policy and enforcement arms of our border. 

 9 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 

 The new Australian Border Force is better equipped, and thanks to 

 centralised coordination of visa and document intelligence, better 

 informed to deal with threats at the border.   

 At the same time, we are streamlining trade for trusted Australian 

 businesses through an almost $70 million investment in the Australian 

 trusted trader programme. 

 Legitimate low risk travellers and traders enjoy easier passage at the 

 border, while the ABF sharpens its focus on threats and high risk activity. 

 

 NEW VISA RISK ASSESSMENT CAPABILITY  

 This work will continue in a second term for a Coalition Government. 

 Traditionally, while visa applicants have to meet character and security 

 criteria, much of the risk assessment has focused on the immigration 

 risk. 

 - That is, will the applicant overstay their visa or work when they 

 don’t have work rights? 

 Decision makers need to have the tools to take a closer look at a 

 traveller’s broader criminal and security risks.   

 They need to know much more about visa applicants and whether they 

 pose a threat to the community. 

 So tonight I announce the Turnbull Government will establish a new Visa 

 Risk Assessment Capability within the Department of Immigration and 

 Border Protection. 

 10 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 

 This capability will consolidate immigration and border information to 

 enable better informed decision-making and threat identification.  

 Decision makers will not have to go searching for the information.  It will 

 become an integral part of their processing system. 

 Risks will be more easily identified at the visa application stage, before 

 individuals even reach the border.   

 This $99.2 million investment will enable the Department to better 

 assess terrorism and criminal threats to Australia.  

 The Visa Risk Assessment system will build on the Coalition 

 Government’s efforts to tackle identify fraud. 

 People attempting to use fraudulent passports to cross our border is not 

 new, and my Department has put great effort into training staff to detect 

 fakes. 

 But a real challenge is where the documents are genuine, but the 

 traveller is not.  

 We have had instances where a criminal or person with terrorist intent 

 has left or entered the country, using a relative’s passport. 

 Staff are good at detecting this fraud, but technology is leaping ahead. 

 Our departure and arrival SmartGates use facial biometric technology to 

 confirm the identity of the traveller and authenticate travel documents. 

 Rollout of the departure SmartGates began in 2015, as part of a $630 

 million effort to boost counter-terrorism measures. 

 Already, nearly six million passengers have left Australia through the 

 departure SmartGates.  

 11 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 

 And the rollout of all 92 SmartGates will be completed in coming weeks.  

 

 Conclusion 

 Ladies and gentlemen. 

 Terror attacks at home, in Paris and Brussels - as well as the enduring 

 legacy of Labor’s years of border mismanagement - remind us of that no 

 Australian Government can provide domestic security without strong 

 border security. 

 We must be more resourceful than those who seek to do us harm.  

 And we must be more creative and innovative in ensuring the smoother 

 passage of legitimate people and goods across our border. 

 The Coalition Government has strengthened the nation’s capacity to 

 deal with threats, while easing the burdens on legitimate travellers and 

 businesses.  

 We will not stop here.   

 A re-elected Coalition Government will continue to improve Australia’s 

 capacity to manage and identify risks across the border to keep 

 Australians safe, prosperous and secure. 

 Thank you 

 

 [ends]  

 12 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 

 

 

 Attachment A - Statistics 

 

 Migration 

 In 2015-16 to 31 March 2016, granted 5,878,480 temporary visas 

 (329,521  more than the previous year) 

 As at 31 March 2016, provided 142,806 places for the 2015-16 Migration 

 Programme 

 Travellers  In 2015-16 to 31 March 2016, processed 31.16 million air and sea  travellers (with 86.6 per cent of passengers cleared within 30 minutes) 

 Trade 

 In 2015-16 to 31 March, over 2.3 million import sea cargo reports have 

 been reported to the Department, as have approximately 26 million air 

 cargo consignments. 

 In 2015-16 to 31 March, we have undertaken 1,449,817 inspections of air 

 cargo and 72,012 inspections of sea cargo. 

 In 2015-16 to 29 February, we have undertaken 37 million inspections of 

 international mail. 

 Detections 

 In 2015-16 to 29 February, we have made 11,055 detections of major 

 drugs and precursors weighing more than 2,984 kg 

 In 2015-16 to 31 March, we have made 69 detections of tobacco 

 smuggling in sea cargo equating to a duty evasion of more than $32 

 million. 

 Reporting of tobacco detections in International Mail commenced 1 

 January 2016. From this time until 31 March 2016 we have made 12,528 

 detections equating to a duty evasion of more than $5 million. 

 In 2015-16 to 29 February, we have made 1,027 detections of undeclared 

 firearms, parts and accessories. 

 

 

