---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Melbourne, Victoria: 25 May 2016: Investing in ovarian cancer research; Nova Peris; Mr Turnbull and Alan Jones; Turnbull Government's retrospective changes to superannuation; Heritage Bank; Banking Royal Commission; election compaign; Mathias Cormann endorses Labor; Budget repair and Reserve Bank commentary; asylum seekers; newspoll"
date: "2016-05-25"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Investing in ovarian cancer research"
  - "Nova Peris"
  - "Mr Turnbull and Alan Jones"
  - "Turnbull Government's retrospective changes to superannuation"
  - "Heritage Bank"
  - "Banking Royal Commission"
  - "election compaign"
  - "Mathias Cormann endorses Labor"
  - "Budget repair and Reserve Bank commentary"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "newspoll"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/228449220
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4586291%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT 

 DOORSTOP 

 MELBOURNE 

 WEDNESDAY, 25 MAY 2016 

 

 SUBJECTS: Investing in ovarian cancer research; Nova Peris; Mr Turnbull and Alan Jones; 

 Turnbull Government’s retrospective changes to superannuation; Heritage Bank; Banking 

 Royal Commission; Election campaign; Mathias Cormann endorses Labor; Budget repair  and Reserve Bank commentary; Asylum seekers; Newspoll 

 CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks everybody. Well again I want 

 to thank Ovarian Cancer Australia for hosting us this morning for morning tea, for a very important 

 announcement in this election campaign. As we travel around the country, Bill and I are hearing 

 some of the most personal and moving stories about people's health journey. People who have 

 suffered from cancer, who are survivors of cancer. And no more so than the announcement that 

 we are making today about an investment that a Shorten Labor government will make, an $8 

 million investment into an area that is really under-researched in this country, and that is ovarian 

 cancer. Many, many people have been touched by ovarian cancer, and it is those stories that we 

 are hearing across the country. We had Ann-Maree come to Canberra not so long ago telling her 

 story, we've got Margaret also who is about to tell her story. It's those stories that really Labor has 

 listened to. Labor has listened to and wants to invest in because we believe the survival rates for 

 women with ovarian cancer are way too low, that we can do better in this country, and I'm very 

 proud that we have with us today Ann-Maree, who is going to tell us a little bit about her cancer  journey, and then Margaret will follow her, and then followed by Bill making the announcement. 

 ANN-MAREE: Well this is just such brilliant news for women with ovarian cancer. There's been no 

 advancement in treatment options in 30 years. Imagine if that was the mobile phone. We're 

 desperate for research to improve those survival rates, and that takes big funding commitments 

 like this. I was really overwhelmed by the emotional response of both Prime Minister Malcolm 

 Turnbull and Mr Shorten when I shared my story in Canberra. I told them 54 per cent dead within 

 five years is the worst of any women’s cancer, and it's not good enough. And that research is the 

 only way that we can change that. I lost one of my oldest and dearest school friends to cancer two 

 weeks ago. If there had been investment like this earlier in treatment options, she might still be 

 here. We really deserve some hope with this disease. Women living with ovarian cancer are not a 

 lost cause. Hope is what today's commitment provides. So thank you Mr Shorten. It's a great step 

 towards change after 30 years of standstill. It tells me that women with ovarian cancer are not a 

 lost cause to you. And it means, after 30 years, maybe change is coming. Very simply it means  more of us might survive. And that I might be there for my two little boys to watch them grow up.  

 MARGARET: Hi, I'm Margaret. I'm one of the lucky ones. I was diagnosed six years ago with 

 ovarian cancer. I felt unwell and because of my husband, who made me go to hospital, I survived 

 because I was diagnosed at stage two. Through ovarian cancer, I have met women who are stage 

 four who are still battling to survive, because they were diagnosed too late. So, if we could find 

 some way, like they do with breast cancer, to have a screening beforehand, I think it would be 

 wonderful but there's just not enough money or research that goes into ovarian cancer to make it 

 that every woman has a chance to do that. And thank you, Bill, for giving this money to us to try 

 and help women who, unfortunately, will not be here in another few years’ time. If we can make it 

 so that, like breast cancer, we have that research early, then we may save a lot of lives. Thank  you. 

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Good morning, everybody, and I'd first of all 

 like to thank Ann-Maree and Margaret for sharing their experiences with all of us. I've known 

 Margaret for some time, she's a family friend and, of course, we all heard Ann-Maree speak in 

 Canberra so movingly. The dream that we could assist mums grow old and watch their children 

 grow up is a pretty noble dream. So Ann-Maree, Margaret and, indeed, Ovarian Cancer Australia, 

 have been very influential in our thoughts that Catherine and I are announcing today. It's with 

 great pleasure I'm announcing that Labor will fund collaborative research over the next four years 

 into the causes of ovarian cancer and methods by which we can have better early detection. 1,500 

 women this year, thereabouts, will be diagnosed with ovarian cancer. Nearly a thousand will die 

 from ovarian cancer this year. The early signs and symptoms cannot be screened at this point. 

 There are symptoms which are often mistaken for other causes - tiredness, bloating, fatigue, 

 going through menopause. The early detection of ovarian cancer will make a quantum difference 

 in the successful treatment of ovarian cancer. Labor signed up to Ovarian Cancer Australia's 

 approach, Vision 25-25. Increasing the survival rates by 25 per cent, the survival rates in the first 

 five years after detection, to increase by 25 per cent by 2025. That's the goal which we set 

 ourselves to. And that's why today I pledge an $8 million support and research over the next four 

 years. Australia does well on global standings but we can do better for the survivors, we can do 

 better for the families and for the memory of those who didn't survive. This is an ongoing 

 challenge and indeed in this current election, there is a lot being said about health care and can 

 we afford to have improved investment in health care? I believe Australia cannot afford not to 

 increase our investment in health care. Be it the research, be it saving bulk billing, be it supporting 

 the bulk billing of pathology tests and X-rays and ultrasounds, vital in the treatment of ovarian 

 cancer. There is nothing which, in my opinion, highlights the difference more starkly in approach in 

 this election than the challenge of properly funding health care. I believe that Australia cannot 

 afford not to increase our expenditure on health care. If we look at the consequences of the 

 conversation and the choices that get made at this election, it really does bear examination. On 

 one hand, Labor and I, believe if we properly fund health care, we can provide Australians, make 

 all Australians with the opportunity to be healthier and, indeed, when they get sick, to recover and 

 live longer lives full of meaning. The alternative choice might well be to give tax cuts to 

 corporations, but a nation which says that it cannot afford the best possible health care for  Australians is a nation that's letting down Australians. We're happy to take questions. 

 JOURNALIST: Have you - the ALP executive about a new candidate for the Northern Territory? 

 What is Labor doing to bring the business community on side? 

 SHORTEN: The Labor Party will work through its processes and we'll have a new Senate 

 candidate for the Northern Territory in reasonably rapid time. In terms of Nova Peris, I had an 

 opportunity yesterday to acknowledge her service. I would like to do so again today. It is not an 

 easy decision to step back from public life but Nova Peris has never shirked it. She has been a 

 champion for women in her career on the track and indeed in Parliament. She has my best 

 wishes. She will be a contributor to public life and society whatever she chooses to do. The Labor 

 Party has picked replacements in the past. We've got our processes to do so, we'll do so again  quickly. 

 JOURNALIST: Given the controversy last time around, why not let the NT Labor branch take 

 control this time and make the final decision? Would you like to see an Indigenous woman  selected? 

 SHORTEN: The Party has got rules in an election period on how to pick candidates. And of 

 course there's less than six weeks to the election. We'll consult, the Party will get this process  right, I've got no doubt about that. 

 There was an earlier question, I neglected to answer where you talked about our relations with 

 business. Labor has excellent relations with business but I don't think that the price of having 

 excellent relations with business should be to spend $50 billion of taxpayer money on a tax cut. 

 The best things I can do for business is make sure their workforce is healthy, the best thing I can 

 do for business is make sure they have a well-educated and skilled workforce. And businesses  understand the fundamental importance of these goals. 

 JOURNALIST: Would you like to see an Indigenous woman pre-selected? 

 SHORTEN: I would like to see the best candidate pre-selected. I've got a track record in my time 

 of pushing for the pre-selection of Indigenous candidates. If you will excuse a little moment of 

 boasting, we have Pat Dodson and Linda Burnie running. Very distinguished Indigenous 

 Australians, and they're very distinguished Australians full stop. I'm more than confident that the  Labor Party will pick a good candidate. 

 JOURNALIST: Malcolm Turnbull seems to have made up with Alan Jones and attacked your 

 negative gearing plans. We know that the public seem to trust the Coalition with the economy,  how hard will it be for Labor to try to steal that mantle away? 

 SHORTEN: Whilst I haven't had a chance to study in depth the reconciliation interview between 

 Mr Turnbull and Mr Jones, I do understand Mr Jones pushed Mr Turnbull on the question of 

 retrospective changes to superannuation. Mr Jones knows, many Australians know, I certainly do, 

 that the Budget, the election Budget of Mr Turnbull and Mr Morrison, contained significant 

 changes to tax treatment of superannuation retrospectively. Now I said on Budget Reply night, 

 these changes had me gravely concerned of the retrospective nature of them. Some people say, 

 and Mr Turnbull says, it's only some people with bigger superannuation accounts who are affected 

 so who cares if it's retrospective? That's a simple summary of the proposition, including this 

 morning on Jones. But the truth of the matter is we ask millions of Australians to invest in their 

 retirement funds in advance of them being able to use it. We tell them compulsorily they have to 

 save money for their retirement, which is very important, but part of the contract of telling 

 Australians you have to save money for your retirement, you can't access it now, is that we don't 

 change the goal posts retrospectively. What Mr Turnbull and Mr Morrison have done is they have 

 sent a shockwave through superannuation. Mr Turnbull keeps evading the issue. Peter Costello 

 knows these changes are retrospective. Alan Jones knows they're retrospective. The Institute of 

 Public Affairs knows they are retrospective. None of these people are particularly left wing in their 

 view of the world. I know they're retrospective. The only people arguing for retrospective laws in 

 superannuation are Mr Turnbull and Mr Morrison. It is leading a cloud of uncertainty over every  Australians' superannuation. 

 JOURNALIST: Heritage Bank in Queensland is objecting to Labor's use of 'people first'. I know 

 you might have had your battles with banks but stealing their ideas? Will you take action after their  legal action this morning? 

 SHORTEN: I don't accept your characterisation at all, Andrew, with respect. The Labor Party has 

 been putting people first for 120 years. It's the idea upon which the Labor Party was formed. We 

 are the party of the middle class and the working class families and individuals of Australian 

 society. We are putting people first in our commitment to health care. The truth of the matter is this 

 election is coming down to choices. Mr Turnbull's election Budget, a week before he formally 

 called the election, chose to spend $50 billion in corporate tax cuts. Labor's chosen to spend $49 

 billion on education and Medicare. Mr Turnbull is spending people's money, he's just not spending 

 it on Australian people. When I get criticised by a bank, I hardly call that a remarkable event 

 because Labor is committed to a Royal Commission into the banking sector. We are not going to 

 let go of this issue. We are the voice of millions of Australians who want to see a better ethical 

 standard from our banking sector. Mr Turnbull never talks about a banking Royal Commission. 

 When you hear a financial institution attacking Labor, I have to say back: why is it that financial 

 institutions are so desperate to avoid the public scrutiny of a banking Royal Commission? If 

 elected on July 2, Labor will implement a banking royal commission because we believe that the  scandals need to stop. 

 JOURNALIST: There was a GP last week who took to Facebook to say an event had been 

 cancelled, he was quite angry about that. Will you apologise to him and contact him to do so? 

 SHORTEN: First of all Jason, I should have mentioned it earlier, I just want to say happy birthday. 

 I'm sorry you got the weather in Melbourne and not up in Brissie. 

 In terms of the arrangement of our events, we don't wish to inconvenience everyone. I am sorry if 

 there was any inconvenience undergone, but I can make no apology for talking about health care 

 for the last seven days. Mr Turnbull wants to say this nation cannot afford to invest in our health 

 care system. I couldn't disagree more. The truth of the matter is what Mr Turnbull is doing is 

 saying he doesn't have the money to invest in Medicare, in pathology bulk billing, in research into 

 medical care but he has enough money to spend on tax cuts for large banks and major 

 corporations. Mr Turnbull says we can't afford to do more for the health care of Australians. A 

 leader who does not prioritise the health care of all Australians needs to change his priorities and,  if Mr Turnbull can't change his priorities, he needs to change his job. 

 JOURNALIST: Mathias Cormann this morning has given you a ringing endorsement, are you glad 

 to see he has seen the light? 

 SHORTEN: Well, I've been travelling all round Australia and Australians do want to hear a positive 

 discussion about ideas about the future. We put a very clear proposition to Australians. We will 

 choose to spend scarce taxpayer money on the health care needs of Australians, on the 

 education of Australians, on the education of Australian children. Mr Turnbull will spend in an 

 election the same amount of money except he will spend it on corporate tax cuts. As for Senator 

 Cormann's comments, I guess it is the second Coalition Minister this week to come out in support 

 of our policies. Sussan Ley famously said this week she would have liked to have convinced 

 Treasury and Finance about adopting our health policies. I guess Senator Cormann officially  terminated Mr Turnbull's scare campaign. 

 JOURNALIST: The Reserve Bank Governor Glenn Stevens has sounded a warning. He says that 

 the economy is vulnerable to future shocks and that whoever takes government will have to do 

 years and years of budget repair. Do you agree with that outlook from him? What will you do on  budget repair given some of your big-spending commitments in this campaign so far? 

 SHORTEN: I want to address the comments of the Reserve Bank but the second part of your 

 question I want to go to immediately. Do not fall for the big lie of this election that because we've 

 announced things since the formal election’s called, that everything Mr Turnbull announced the 

 previous week in his Budget doesn't qualify as election spending. You and I both know that Mr 

 Turnbull, in his Budget, made very clear political choices. He made a clear political choice, an 

 election choice, to hand away $50 billion in tax cuts to corporations. He made a very clear political 

 choice in his Budget to hand away $17 billion in income tax cuts for people in the very top tax 

 bracket. He's making a very clear political choice to keep spending $32 billion on the people who 

 are able to negatively gear. By contrast, Labor is making a very clear choice we will put the health 

 care of every Australian first, that we will put the education of every Australian child first. Mr 

 Turnbull is spending as much, if not more money than Labor, but he's just not spending it on 

 Australians. In terms of the Reserve Bank Governor or the outgoing Governor's comments, I first 

 of all would like to acknowledge his remarkable tenure as the Governor of the Reserve Bank. In 

 terms of what he says about Budget repair, he's absolutely right. Budget repair has to be 

 undertaken. I announced in my Budget Reply speech winding back the private sector loans 

 scandal in TAFE and vocational education. That will add billions of dollars in saved government 

 spending. We will not go down the path of Mr Abbott's and now Mr Turnbull's Emissions 

 Reduction Fund which is paying polluters billions of dollars to keep polluting. We will not go ahead 

 with the marriage equality plebiscite which most Australians know is $160 million of government 

 money being wasted. Labor has a plan to reduce wasteful government spending. We have a plan 

 not to spend $50 billion on tax cuts for corporations and we have a plan to ensure that Australians  get the best quality healthcare and the best possible education. Any more questions? 

 JOURNALIST: On asylum seekers, is Canada shaping up to be the most viable option for a Labor 

 Government in terms of resettlement if indeed you are elected? 

 SHORTEN: Well, on asylum seekers, let's get these three points clear in black and white. One, 

 the people smugglers and the criminal syndicates who put vulnerable people in unsafe boats with 

 the prospect of drowning at sea get no succour or sympathy from either Liberal or Labor. We are 

 bipartisan in our determination to defeat the criminals who put people on unsafe boats and drown 

 at sea. The second point needs to be clear, we do not believe that the consequence of deterring 

 and defeating the people smugglers in their evil trade comes at the price of indefinite detention in 

 Manus and Nauru and we would engage in regional resettlement with the sort of vigour we haven't 

 seen from this Government in the last three years. And three, when it comes to negotiating with 

 the governments of specific nations, I pledge that if we are elected I will put Richard Marles, our 

 Immigration Minister, on a plane to talk to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. We will 

 negotiate in a fair dinkum manner to make sure we have regional resettlement, but never again  will we allow the people smugglers back into business. One more question. 

 JOURNALIST: Do you agree with the Newspoll this morning that Malcolm Turnbull is more 

 arrogant than you? 

 SHORTEN: Unlike Mr Turnbull, I'm not going to start casting aspersions about my opponent. The 

 truth of the matter is it is the Australian people who matter in this election, not what I think of him 

 or he thinks of me. I think his scare campaign is running out of puff. The truth of the matter is we 

 have got well-funded policies that prioritise healthcare which prioritise the health of all Australians. 

 I never want to see an Australian who is sick deterred from going to the doctor, from getting the 

 pathology test, from getting the help they need or prescription medicine because of cost. I don't 

 agree with Mr Turnbull that improving the health of Australians is a cost. I actually think it's an 

 investment. Mr Turnbull loves to talk about the economy. Let me be very clear, a healthy Australia 

 is a healthier workforce. A healthy Australia is one where we end up spending less in the long-term on our health care. The same goes for education. If I can give the employers of Australia the 

 best educated workforce in the world, then we will move ahead in leaps and bounds. We believe 

 our policies are well funded and the way we pay for our policies is not by spending $50 billion of 

 taxpayer money in giving a tax cut to large multinationals. The choice is that clear. Thank you  everybody. See you soon. 

 ENDS 

 

