---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 30 November 2016: TIMSS data; schools' funding; Senate procurement rules; Peter Dutton and the US resettlement deal"
date: "2016-11-30"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "TIMSS data"
  - "schools' funding"
  - "Senate procurement rules"
  - "Peter Dutton and the US resettlement deal"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/238215714
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4968220%22
---

 

 THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  MEMBER FOR SYDNEY   

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY, 30 NOVEMBER 2016                                                                

 SUBJECTS: TIMSS data; Schools’ funding; Senate procurement rules; Peter  Dutton and the US resettlement deal.  

 TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Well, thanks for  coming out this morning. I just wanted to make a few comments about the ACER  report this morning on the international TIMSS test. It’s the test that looks at year  four and year eight students and their ability in maths and science. This test shows  that Australian students’ results have been flat-lining for two decades, and countries  around the world are leaving us behind. These results show exactly why Labor  believes in needs-based funding for our schools. The results show big differences  between students who are growing up in remote and regional areas, kids from  poorer backgrounds, Aboriginal kids. It shows that we need to invest more to make  sure that those kids who are falling behind right now, get the individual help they  need to catch up, not just to their peer group around Australia, but to make sure that  we are internationally competitive in maths and science.  

 These results also show that we have fewer students performing at the very high end  of results, very high end results. Singapore, for example, has many, many students  that are actually performing well above what is expected of students their age.  Australia has a fraction of students performing at those very high levels. The great  thing about the individual attention that children can get through needs-based  funding is that the kids who are falling behind, who find maths and science difficult,  get the help they need, and the kids who are gifted and talented, who have the ability  to really extend themselves in these areas, actually get the help they need as well.  Now predictably, the Government is saying well it’s not all about money, but I can tell  you for certain you can’t get these better results, we can’t better support teachers,  we can’t have more individual attention in the classroom, without extra funding. So,  Labor has always said that we need a clear plan for how extra funding is spent. We  need to make sure that more students are graduating from year 12, that more of  them are doing maths and science right through the senior years, that more teachers 

 who are teaching maths and science actually have a maths and science background,  a specialist qualification in the subject that they’re teaching. We say that more kids  should be studying coding in schools. We need to have a plan for improving the  education system, but we can’t do that without the extra funding.  

 This Government is committed to cutting $30 billion from our schools over the next  decade. That’s an average of three million dollars per school over the next decade.  That’s a lot of cake stalls for parents to try and make up. We know that the extra  funding in the early years of needs-based funding was already making a difference.  This test was taken in 2014 by these children, so only about seven per cent of the  extra needs-based funding had flowed at that time. Since then, as I visit schools,  principals will tell me, parents will tell me, the difference that the extra funding is  making. Better support, more training for teachers, more individual attention for kids,  particularly kids who are falling behind, more options for kids who are gifted and  talented, languages, music. For kids who are starting school with all sorts of  developmental delays, they’re able to get speech pathology, occupational therapy.  So much is being done for our children now, and what Simon Birmingham, the  Education Minister, is proposing, is that he will not fund years five and six of the  Gonski needs-based funding package. The Liberals promised they would, Simon  Birmingham is breaking that promise, and the cost will be in the results of our  children for years to come. Any questions? 

 JOURNALIST: Just on another topic, what do you make of the Commonwealth  procurement rules that the Government’s dealt out to the Senate to get their support  of the ABCC? 

 PLIBERSEK: Look, we only heard about them last night. I believe Senator Carr, the  industry spokesperson, has responded favourably to those changes. But I guess  what they really show, is that you’ve got a government so desperate to get legislation  through that they’ve basically gone to the crossbench and said name your price, we’ll  do anything you want. And given that the Government said that to the crossbench,  what really surprises me is that Nick Xenophon and his supporters, his party  members, have not demanded a better deal for water for South Australia. We’ve got  Barnaby Joyce, the Deputy Prime Minister, out there threatening to unravel the  Murray-Darling plan. It’s a very serious concern for South Australians and Nick  Xenophon doesn’t seem to have made that part of his negotiating strategy, it’s  beyond me why.  

 JOURNALIST: And just on another topic, Peter Dutton’s interview with Sky last  night, what do you make of the comments that refugees who agree to resettle in the  US could be given help to reunite with their families, and also his words that there  won’t be a cap on the intake that the US will take? 

 PLIBERSEK: Well, I mean, it’s about time Peter Dutton did something to get people  off Nauru and Manus Island, those people have been there much too long and of  course Labor welcomes the proposed resettlement in the United States. As for the  details, well, Peter Dutton, you know, he is not someone I take at face value, so we’ll  see over time how this pans out. We certainly hope for the people who are on Manus  Island and Nauru that a third country resettlement option is available to all of them,  because they have been waiting much too long for that.  

 JOURNALIST: And just finally on that topic if I may, what do you make of his  comments, there were two things, the first that he said if those refugees and asylum  seekers that are on Manus and Nauru and aren’t inclined to go to the US, that  they’re not genuine. And also, his words that if people find mould on their beds in  those camps that they should clean it themselves because Australia’s not running a  hotel.  

 PLIBERSEK: Look, I don’t want to give a running commentary on the sort of things  Peter Dutton says. I mean he was voted by doctors the most incompetent Health  Minister in living memory, I don’t think he’s done much better as Immigration  Minister. The simple fact is people have been waiting too long for resettlement and  we hope they’ll be resettled as quickly as possible. 

 JOURNALIST: Thanks. 

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350   

