---
title: "Recent incidents in Nauru"
date: "2016-05-03"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/227441042
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4538740%22
---

 1 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 STATEMENT 

 

 3 May 2016  

 RECENT INCIDENTS IN NAURU   

 

 The woman involved in the self-immolation incident in Nauru last night has been  transferred to Australia.   

 She remains in a critical condition and all efforts are being made to meet her medical  needs. We can only hope for the best possible outcome.   

 In this and the previous incident, both patients have received the utmost care, treatment  and consideration, both in Nauru and in Australia.    

 I want to thank the medical staff of the Nauru Hospital, the IHMS clinic, those who  assisted on the scene and the Government of Nauru for dealing with these extremely  distressing situations.   

 It is of grave concern that this person would resort to such an extreme act of self-harm.   

 I have previously expressed my frustration and anger at advocates and others who are  in contact with those in Regional Processing Centres and who are encouraging them to  engage in behaviours they believe will pressure the Government to bring them to  Australia.   

 These behaviours have intensified in recent times, and as we see, have now turned to  extreme acts with terrible consequences.   

 Advocates and others who proclaim to represent and support the interests of refugees  and asylum seekers must hear a clear message that their activities and these  behaviours must end.    

 They can oppose government policy and espouse a cause for open borders, but that is  not the policy of this Government and no action advocates or those in regional  processing countries take will cause the Government to deviate from its course.   

 We are not going to allow people to drown at sea again. Twelve hundred people  drowned when Australia lost control of our borders.   

 2 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 The recent behaviours in Nauru are not protests against living conditions, access to  healthcare or financial support.   

 The Australian Government has strengthened IHMS’ health care staff of 52 health  professionals, including 22 mental health staff, in Nauru.   

 An additional eight health staff, including four metal health professionals, were deployed  last week.  Another 12 (including mental health staff) are being sent this week.   

 This effort is in addition to an investment of $11 million for the medical clinic at the  Regional Processing Centre and $26.5 million to upgrade the Nauru Hospital.   

 The Nauru Government and people have been unfairly portrayed by advocates.   

 Already, Nauru hosts some 700 refugees in its community.   

 There are about 350 refugees employed in a range of occupations, others have  established their own businesses.   

 Children have access to education and health care.   

 Far from living in the hell-hole advocates would have you believe, refugees in Nauru are  free from a fear of persecution and many are building new lives.   

 Advocates should reflect on their messages of false hope and misleading portrayal of  the situation in Nauru.   

 While some may be encouraged by messages of false hope, and some may resort to  extreme action, the Government will not be dissuaded from its stated border protection  policies.   

 I have been advised of threats to damage the medical facility. We will not tolerate  threats to assets in Nauru, such as the hospital, that have been provided for the benefit  of both those in the Regional Processing Centre, refugees and the people of Nauru.   

 Transferees have the option of resettlement in a third country or returning to their home  country.  The Government has offered assistance for these options.   

 The Government has been absolutely clear:  we do not want to see the restart of boats  and deaths at sea.     

 Persons transferred to Regional Processing Centres will not be resettled in Australia.   

 

 Further information: Minister’s office - 02 6277 7860  

