---
title: "Transcript of press conference: National Press Club, Canberra, ACT: 10 May 2016: budget 2016; Australia's AAA credit rating; debt ceiling; Malcolm Turnbull's $50 billion big business tax cuts; Labor's plans for health spending; income tax rates; policy costings; asylum seekers; Reserve Bank; submarines; Labor's education policy; superannuation; backpacker tax"
date: "2016-05-10"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "budget 2016"
  - "Australia's AAA credit rating"
  - "debt ceiling"
  - "Malcolm Turnbull's $50 billion big business tax cuts"
  - "Labor's plans for health spending"
  - "income tax rates"
  - "policy costings"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Reserve Bank"
  - "submarines"
  - "Labor's education policy"
  - "superannuation"
  - "backpacker tax"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/227927610
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4554212%22
---

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON    

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  QUESTION & ANSWER  NATIONAL PRESS CLUB, CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 10 MAY 2016    

 SUBJECT/S: Budget 2016; Australia’s AAA credit rating; Debt ceiling; Malcolm  Turnbull’s $50 billion big business tax cuts; Labor’s plans for health spending;  income tax rates; policy costings; asylum seekers; Reserve Bank; submarines;  Labor’s education policy; superannuation; Backpacker Tax.    

 CHRIS UHLMANN, HOST: We'll take questions now and I might begin by asking that  between - you rightly criticised the Government for increasing debt and deficit so can you  name a time between the 08-09 Budget and the 13-14 Budget where debt and deficit didn't  go up every year? And I take you particularly to one you are very familiar with, the last one  where between the Budget and PEFO - a space of three months - a deficit went up from  $18 to $30 billion. So why should people trust that you'll get this right in the future if you  didn't get it right in the past?    

 CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Two things Chris. Labor governed in the biggest  economic crisis in 70 years and yet we managed to maintain a triple-A credit rating. This  was a difficult time. This Government on the other hand has frankly been blessed with a  much more benign international environment, not without its challenges, but much more  benign than the environment that Wayne Swan and Lindsay Tanner and Penny Wong and I  were dealing with and they have very little in terms of alibi.    

 Secondly, in terms of projection and forecast I've made it clear our policy of outsourcing our  forecasting to the Parliamentary Budget Office. This is not because the PBO would be in  some senses any more innately competent than the Treasury, but because it's good  economic governance.    

 Best practice international economic governance is to separate the political decisions in a  Budget from the underlying forecasts - when I deliver a Budget there will be no question  about the independence of the forecast, independently and transparently developed by the  Parliamentary Budget Office, appropriately resourced.    

 JOURNALIST: You've critiqued the forecasts very heavily, the Treasury’s forecasts in the  Budget and as you've said you want to take responsibility away from the Treasury, you then  will have a mini-Budget in three months, to review those forecasts. We've heard this script  before. What guarantee can you give that you won't use the updated forecasts to back  down on your promise?    

 BOWEN: As I said Peter, we don't need to back down on our promises because we are  making firm and clear commitments which are controversial. We knew when we announced 

 negative gearing reform. Frankly nobody had the courage to do it for 30 years, we knew it  would be controversial. We knew the Liberals would run a scare campaign against our  capital gains tax changes, we knew that would be controversial but they're necessary to pay  for our commitments and for Budget repair and the others we've announced and so what  we've done is lay out a very carefully calibrated plan and we'll continue to do so. We’ve got  two months of election days to fill with commitments and announcements, not all of which  have been or will be universally popular at all times, but are necessary. And we want to see,  I want to see a Budget and economic statement in the first three months used to implement  our policies, not walk away from them.    

 JOURNALIST: …give that guarantee?    

 BOWEN: Absolutely.    

 JOURNALIST: Thank you for your speech. Pity about the beard but you know.    

 BOWEN: It's had fans and detractors. I've done some controversial things in my day but  shaving it and growing it off are two of the most controversial things I have ever done in  politics.    

 JOURNALIST: That was my question! That was it.    

 BOWEN: It's your question? Great.    

 JOURNALIST: Given your concerns about the rating and your plan to have an early mini-Budget, will that mini-Budget include a reinstatement of the debt ceiling and given the  figures we've got at the moment can you put a level on it?    

 BOWEN: I have no plans to reinstate the debt ceiling.    

 JOURNALIST: I have a question about a Labor policy I found from 2010. This was where  Labor went to the people at the election with a plan to reduce the company tax rate by 2 per  cent and did it with economic modelling that showed that this plan would not only increase  growth but would also increase wages. Why is it that a plan that was right for 2010 at a time  of deficits and slow growth is not a good plan now when we have exactly the same  problems? Are you being a populist by telling people what you think they want to hear rather  than telling them what the economy needs and do you acknowledge that a company tax cut  can lift growth?    

 BOWEN: So, David, that would be the company tax cut the Liberals and Nationals voted  against with the Greens and blocked in the Senate. That would be the company tax cut that  you’re referring to. These are matters of priorities and I’ve laid out pretty clearly today our  policy of protecting the AAA rating and investing in school and hospitals. These things mean  that we do have to make decisions and this tax cut simply cannot be afforded at this time.  Would we at a perfect time when fiscal circumstances allow prefer corporate tax to be lower  than higher? Sure, but Budgets are about choices and we invest in schools and let me tell  you, there's a clear and unmistakable economic dividend, the OECD has identified it, a  2.8% lift in GDP unless…if we can get every school student with the basic skills they need  when they graduate. That’s real. That's a real impact and the Government says that they  can tell you the ten year impact on economic growth for their policy but they really struggle  to tell you the ten year cost. Let me preempt a question. Let me reject as completely  discredited, Laffer Curve economics, the idea that somehow this tax cut will pay for itself.  Fiscal recklessness and we'll have no part of it.    

 JOURNALIST: Inside Story - I just wanted to ask about the given the emphasis you've put  on the AAA rating in this speech and maintaining it and you quoted the Moody's report from  last week and Moody’s made it very clear that if we didn't have rapid progress towards  closing the Budget deficit we would be in trouble. You haven't set a date for getting back  into black. Do you expect to do so in this campaign or will we have to wait until MYEFO 90  days after the election to find out?    

 BOWEN: What we will do, Tony Burke and I during the election campaign in the latter part,  as you would imagine, after we've announced the vast bulk of our policies we will release  updated fiscal consolidations of the impact of our policies - the impact on the budget bottom  line, over both the forwards and the ten year period and of course that will enable then us to  say more about the trajectory back to Budget balance. Inevitably, the projections as much  as I dispute them in the Budget are the only projections, are the official starting point at this  time for that conversation but we will be providing that further impact as well as further  details around all our costings and the process therewith.    

 JOURNALIST: You talk about in your speech, over the next ten years, sorry, let me quote  it, that you will save more than you're going to spend. Can I concentrate on the next four  years in terms of the AAA rating based on what the Labor Party has announced in terms of  policy. That you're going to spend in the next four years and what you've announced in  terms of tax increases the pretty much net, I think you’re a couple of billion up. But there is  over the next four years $20 billion in measures still before the Senate that you don't  support from 2014 - welfare cuts, primarily in higher education cuts and both the PBO and  the Government estimates they are about $60 billion over a decade. Are you saying you  can still raise more than you're going to spend over four years or a decade and not  implement any of those funding cuts and still have enough left over to credibly pay down  debt and deficit which is going satisfy Moody's, S&P?    

 BOWEN: We make no apologies for providing a ten year timeframe as well as a four year  timeframe. Tony Burke and I do that deliberately because that's just what the Budget needs.  The Budget needs long-term good quality saves for a return to balance over the medium  term. The last thing the real economy needs at the moment is a massive withdrawal of fiscal  activity in some rush to surplus over the next four years, so we do that deliberately and it is  a point the Business Council has made. We need to have a longer-term time frame when it  comes to the impact of government decisions in budgets and we agree and we've again led  that debate. In relation to the four year estimates, we make again no apologies for many of  the measures we've made building slowly over time. The Government's first criticism of our  negative gearing policy before they settled on a shrill and irresponsible scare campaign was  to say it doesn't raise enough. It only raises half a billion over four years. Yes guilty as  charged because that's the sort of change we need. Measures which start small and build  over time for Budget repair and as I said in answer to Tim's question, the impact of our  decisions over those two time frames will be very clear when Tony Burke and I release the  consolidated figures.    

 JOURNALIST: Thank you for your address. You have promised much in the area of health  spending, you have accused the Government of cutting public hospital funding by some $57  billion yet you presented no figures of your own. By how much and when would you improve  funding to public hospitals, and on a specific health-related matter would you wind back the  freeze of the Medicare rebate which was extended in the Budget by two years, for a saving  of some $900 million?    

 BOWEN: Malcolm you are right to say that we have not yet released our detailed hospital  funding plan. We will be doing that. Catherine King and I have visited every State and  Territory to discuss this with State and Territory colleagues, though we did, correction we 

 spoke to Darwin over the telephone, but we visited every other State and Territory to  discuss with State and Territory colleagues the impact of the Government's cuts and what  they need from us as the alternative Government going forward. We will be announcing in  full detail a hospitals funding plan during the campaign, it will be fully costed and detailed  and it will outline our plans in relation to repairing the damage the Government's done. But  we have prioritised so far the announcement of our schools funding plan and our other  plans. Hospitals will be announced during the campaign and we'll also be making further  announcements about the MBS freeze.    

 JOURNALIST: This time last year you would have got pretty long odds on a situation this  week where Labor is defending superannuation tax concessions against an attack by the  Coalition. Putting aside the Coalition's late conversion to this particular issue, and - you  speak about retrospectivity but what we're talking about really is wealthy people exploiting  our retirement incomes system to avoid paying the tax that they should be paying. There's  nothing noble about what they're doing. There is nothing economically productive about  what they are doing. Why if you're focused on fairness and fiscal discipline don't you  support these changes given the nature of what's been going on in an unsustainable  retirement incomes system now for many years?    

 BOWEN: I think it is fair to say that Labor has identified the issue here and has led the  debate. When Bill Shorten and I last April were saying the superannuation system should  be to provide as many Australians as possible the dignified retirement not for estate  planning, not for using the tax system for massive wealth creation but to ensure that as  many Australians as possible can have a dignified retirement and therefore having almost  40 per cent of the tax concessions going to the top 10 per cent of income earners is neither  fair or sustainable. We led that debate. Remember Joe Hockey was open to reform for 24  hours and then we announced our policy and the debate was shut down. Scott Morrison  who was Social Security Minister led the charge and said that this was an outrageous attack  on Australians’ retirement incomes. As you said, you said you would have got very  interesting odds for this situation 12 months ago - Treasurer Scott Morrison jumping up and  announcing reforms which are retrospective in nature in the retirement phase.    

 I think I outlined, Bernard, in my speech some of the reasons why we find retrospectivity  objectionable. As I said, we accept that these are people of means and by and large Liberal  voters but there's an important principle here. There’s a very important principle - the  principle also goes to undermining confidence in superannuation for everybody. If you're  sitting around wondering where to invest your money and it might be a relatively modest  amount to put extra into super and you say, "But the Government can come along and  change all the rules next year, I think I'll put it somewhere else,” it undermines confidence in  superannuation. And as the party that created superannuation we find that deeply  objectionable, so the Government having railed against the changes, our proposed  changes, which are very sensible and carefully calibrated, some people could say we could  have gone further but they're carefully designed sensible changes, there's been no  consultation with the superannuation sector, Dr Jim Chalmers and I have been talking to the  superannuation sector. I can tell you, there's white hot anger at the lack of consultation from  the sector by this Government. They've got it wrong. Somebody's got to call it out.    

 JOURNALIST: In the 2014 Budget there were concerns raised at the time that the deficit  levy would lead to high income earners getting a bit creative with their income planning.  You've supported the Government's decision to reduce the company tax rate for small firms  down to 27.5 per cent but decided to leave the deficit repair levy in place. Are you worried  that by leaving it in place you are encouraging people at the high end to become even more  creative in their ways to reduce their tax bill and what sort of time frame do you have on the  retention of the deficit repair levy? 

 

 BOWEN: The last bit first. The top marginal tax rate shouldn't be the only one that's special,  shouldn’t be the only one that’s temporary, have some special timetable on its reduction.  Tax rates should be under monitoring and should be improved when fiscal circumstances  allow and that applies to the bottom end, the middle and the top. So I do not support having  some sort of special category for the top tax rate, hence our announcement. Look, this has  been the tax rate now for two years. The world hasn't ended. Of course when fiscal  circumstances allow, again, we'd review all our tax rates with a view to providing relief  where we could when fiscal circumstances allow. But I'm not going to make outlandish  promises about that because the Budget just can't afford it and the tax system is rightly  progressive, and an important part of that progressivity is the top marginal tax rate.    

 JOURNALIST: So, to be clear it's a permanent increase in the top marginal tax rate?    

 BOWEN: As I said on Budget night.    

 JOURNALIST: I wanted to ask you about election policy costings. One of the biggest  changes in recent years is the introduction of the Parliamentary Budget Office. But I want to  ask will you be submitting your policies to Treasury for costing and ensuring that they're  released for people to see well ahead of the election?    

 BOWEN: The Charter of Budget Honesty makes it crystal clear that the Parliamentary  Budget Office is an appropriate costing body of equal status to the Treasury and the  Department of Finance. So they are the body as independent, not part of the Government,  whom we choose to use, as the Liberal and National Party did in Opposition, for our  costings. And they do a good job. We will have more to say during the election campaign  about our costings and the process that has been undertaken and we will be making it very  clear about the amount of rigour that's been applied. But, let’s be very clear also, that is with  due respect to members of the Press Gallery, if there's a dispute between the Treasury and  the Department of Finance and the PBO that is perfectly obviously a legitimate thing to  comment on but the Parliamentary Budget Office is an equal status coster. They are well-resourced, competent people and if there is a dispute between the Treasury and the  Parliamentary Budget Office as to costings, that does not automatically mean that the  Parliamentary Budget Office is in some way in error.    

 JOURNALIST: Just to continue on the question of the Parliamentary Budget Office, you've  said you're going to remove Treasury doing economic parameters and put it in the PBO's  hands, but isn't this rather a sledge hammer approach, which could demoralise Treasury  which has already had a number of cuts and other problems, possibly make the  Parliamentary Budget Office less seen as independent and useful to the opposition and  minor parties? Couldn't you just say as Treasurer "I won't interfere with the figurings that  Treasury produces". And also if Mr Fraser wants to stay on, will you have him stay on or will  you replace him?    

 BOWEN: In relation to the Parliamentary Budget Office and costings and forecasts and  projections this is, as I said before, in my view international best practice economic  governance and there are plenty of examples of this around the world where the central  economic policymaking body of the Government does not do the forecasts underlying the  Budget. It's good practice. The Treasury is an arm of Government. I have a very good  relationship with the Treasury or have had in office. For most of the term of the previous  government I was a Treasury Minister, whether it was Assistant Treasurer, Minister for  Financial Services or Treasurer and I work very closely with the Treasury officials and they  are first class economists and fine Australians. But this is about getting the policy setting  right and the governance settings right and no I do not believe it would undermine the 

 independence of the Parliamentary Budget Office because they guard their independence  fiercely as they should. Legislating that they will do the parameters and the forecasting in  my view does not in the slightest undermine their independence.    

 On the second question as to Mr Fraser, of course ultimately appointments of Secretaries  are the prerogative of the Prime Minister. But I made it very clear when the Government  sacked Martin Parkinson that for 114 years the incoming Government had worked with the  Treasury Secretary. I saw no reason to change that then, I see no reason to change it now.  It's an important principle, the Secretary of the Treasury is not a political play thing, an  important role and office, and that would certainly be the case with me as incoming  Treasurer, that would be respected.    

 JOURNALIST: We've seen in recent days that there is unhappiness within the Labor Party  among its candidates with the Pacific Solution. I don't think anybody can doubt that there is  a human cost with this policy but there is also a fiscal cost, around about a billion dollars a  year. I realise that you’re the author of the stymied Malaysian Solution but as Treasurer and  with this background and knowledge will you be pushing for a better way of spending the  billion dollars that may retrieve this nation's good name?    

 BOWEN: If we saw a return to the people smuggling business model, it would have a  human cost, in drownings at sea. It would have a cost of refugees from around the world not  getting the chance of resettlement in Australia from camps. And it would have a fiscal cost  and the fiscal cost, as substantial as it would be, is in my view not as important as the  human cost of drownings, but it would be real. Offshore processing is expensive but as part  of the mix of policy solutions which lead us then to be able to stop the people smuggling  trade and have no boat arrivals in Australia. It ultimately also avoids us having to spend all  that money which goes to processing onshore arrivals. You're right, the Labor Party is a  party made up of good people wanting to do the right thing by their fellow human beings.  Those of us who have served in the portfolio and served in the Cabinet and have spoken to  the survivors of the capsizings and the boat sinkings know the human cost just as the  frontline servicemen and women do who have pulled people out of the ocean. My moral  compass, our moral compass points us very clearly to lifting the refugee intake, inviting  more refugees into Australia, in a safe and orderly process. So that we never have to go  back to the situation where an Immigration Minister is taking the call at 2 o'clock in the  morning, another boat is sinking. We just cannot countenance that. Yes the Labor Party is a  church full of people who are wanting to do the right thing by their fellow human beings,  you'll have people who sometimes have a different way of doing it. But I can tell you the  Shadow Cabinet, the incoming Cabinet, is unanimously behind Richard Marles and his  determination and Bill Shorten's determination to ensure that the people smuggling trade  does not recommence. We went through an emotional debate at the National Conference.  Tony Burke gave a very fine speech at the National Conference in support of what is a  policy many people will regard as tough but one which is necessary to save lives. And  having been through that debate at National Conference, having made that decision, we  stand by it.    

 JOURNALIST: In 2013 Joe Hockey gave the Reserve Bank $9 billion. Labor criticised it at  the time saying it was ostensibly done to make Labor's deficit look worse. If you were to  come in would you be taking a large chunk of that back to make your deficit look better?    

 BOWEN: Tony Burke's eyes just lit up when you said that. A potential bottom line measure.  No, no, we were critical of that measure because the Government was clearly playing a  political game. Clearly playing a political game, trying to inflate the deficit soon after the  arrival and then take dividends back late and say, "look what wonderful economic managers  we are". Well, that's worked well, the deficit's tripled. While we won't be making further 

 allocations to the Reserve Bank we certainly won't be trying to get that money back. It's  there for the Reserve Bank now. And as you would have noted I welcome the appointment  of Dr Philip Lowe as Reserve Bank Governor and I look forward to a good working  relationship with him as Treasurer.    

 JOURNALIST:  I want to just ask you about the difference in the Budget, are you going to  cut the Budget, if you're elected next election, are you going to recost the cost of building  new submarines?    

 BOWEN: Our Shadow Defence Minister is here and he's come to make sure I answer that  question correctly. The correct answer is we've already announced our defence funding  profile and you'll find very little difference with the Government's.    

 JOURNALIST: Treasury says that company tax cuts will add 1 per cent to growth over ten  years. How much extra growth will Labor policies add?    

 BOWEN: As I've outlined we see investment in schools and education as adding to growth  and the OECD has said a 2.8 per cent dividend if you make sure that every student leaves  with the basic skills they need and we are not doing that at the moment. Our school funding  model is a piece of public policy vandalism. We are disadvantaging children who commit no  crime other than coming from families that are not of means and go to under-resourced  schools. That drives us as a matter of social justice but it annoys us as a matter of  economic policy that we are missing out on all the talent for schools that simply do not have  the investment in them. And let me just completely reject this nonsense that the Liberals  peddle that money doesn't matter. It's offensive. Go and tell the school principals and the  teachers at schools in my electorate and in electorates right around the country, who say “if  just we had a bit extra money we could have this program or that program”. Talk to them  about the programs that they will have to cut if the money is withdrawn that started to flow  under the Gonski funding model. And the difference it's making. The focus on high  technology education. ‘Bring your own device’ in my electorate, a program that is being  introduced with schools in my electorate where children are able to use their devices during  their lessons to learn how to better research and if they don't have a device there's an  opportunity made available to them to use one, sometimes for the first time. These are  programs which make a difference. Of course that's why the OECD finds there's an  economic dividend. So there is an economic dividend from Labor's plan. There’s an  economic dividend from our plan for education. There’s an economic dividend for our plan  for renewables. We should be leading the world in renewables. 88 per cent decline in  investment in renewables on this Government's watch. That's not good for economic  growth. If that's their plan for jobs and growth it's a bad one. We'll fix it.    

 JOURNALIST: Can you tell us about superannuation, not concessions but the  Superannuation Guarantee? Most workers are going to rely on 9.5 per cent at the moment  but you did have a plan to increase it to 12. What's the timetable for that increase? And just  secondly on Backpackers Tax, where do you sit on that?    

 BOWEN: On the Superannuation Guarantee, you are right, we had a policy to lift it to 12  per cent. The Government originally promised, the Liberal Party originally promised just a  slight delay in that, then delayed it three times, in effect froze it. They don't believe in  superannuation. They don't believe in increasing the guarantee from 9 per cent to 12 per  cent. We do. Frankly it's one of the most important things I've done in public life as Minister  for Superannuation. …if it had actually gotten past 9.5 but the PM to take it to 12 was very  important and we'll have more to say about that timeline.    

 JOURNALIST: When will you tell us? 

 

 BOWEN: There's a two month election campaign coming, just bear with us. In relation to  Backpackers Tax, again, dysfunction. I mean, sometimes we're accused of not being  bipartisan enough. Here's one where we said we trust you got this right, we'll facilitate its  passage because you must have done the consultations, you must have done the work.  Clearly they hadn't and now a day after the Budget was delivered there's ministers saying  “we're reviewing that”. You just brought down a Budget! That's when you announce your  policies. And Joel and Anthony and I have been closely monitoring the situation and  consulting with the sector and it is causing very substantial concern among farmers, tourism  operators, hospitality operators, in regional areas. The Government clearly hadn’t done their  homework and now they're all at sea. Cabinet ministers saying that we're still working on it a  day after the Budget was introduced. That is pretty dysfunctional. If they were going to fix it  the time to fix it is in on Budget night.    

 JOURNALIST: One last thing and introduced into the policy debate by my friend and  colleague Malcolm Farr position on the five cent piece, which apparently costs six cents to  make.    

 BOWEN: I saw the Treasurer's response and he got very cranky with you I must say. I'm  not going to get cranky with either of you because it's a legitimate question to raise. I  obviously haven't had access to the advice of the Royal Australian Mint and the Treasurer  as to whether the five cent piece is economic but I'm sure as incoming Treasurer I'll get that  advice and act accordingly. I have no plans to get rid of the five cent piece but I'll get the  advice in an incoming Government brief.    

 JOURNALIST: Please thank the Shadow Treasurer.    

 ENDS 

 

 

