---
title: "Turnbull 'mum' on fate of refugee babies & children"
date: "2016-02-04"
creators:
  - "Bandt, Adam"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/223489197
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4339653%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE  AUSTRALIAN GREENS   

 4 February 2016   

 Turnbull ‘mum’ on fate of refugee babies & children   

 In response to his first question since yesterday’s High Court decision concerning the fate of the 37  babies and 90 children living in Australia, directed to him in Question Time by Greens MP Adam Bandt,  Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull refused to commit to not sending these children currently living in  Australia to Nauru.   

 “It is devastating that Malcolm Turnbull will not commit to letting these children, including 37 babies,  stay in Australia,” Mr Bandt said.   

 “The Prime Minister seems on track to authorise child abuse by sending them to the hellhole of Nauru.”   

 "Malcolm Turnbull won't rule out pulling children out of Australian schools and deporting them."   

 “The government wants to send children to Nauru. Labor wants to send them to a third country. The  Greens want to let them stay.”   

 “The Greens refuse to believe that our only choice is between child abuse and deaths at sea.” 

 “Our country is better than this.” 

 Greens Immigration spokesperson Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said: “Malcolm Turnbull might want to  draw the line at the border, but we draw the line at child abuse.”   

 “When it comes to people seeking asylum, we need to create a fair and efficient system that will bring  them here safely so that they can be integrated into the community.”   

 Media contacts:   

 Adam Bandt - Adam Pulford, 0429 109 054  Sarah Hanson-Young - Noah Schultz-Byard, 0427 604 760   

 You can view Mr Bandt’s question and the Prime Minister’s response on YouTube here.   

 Mr Bandt’s full question to the Prime Minister:   

 My question is to the Prime Minister about yesterday’s High Court decision. The government wants to  send children to Nauru. Labor wants to send them to a third country. The Greens want to let them stay.   

 Prime Minister, this is your first big moral test. Do you really believe that child abuse is somehow  necessary to stop people dying at sea? Will you promise today that no children, including the 37 babies  born here and the kids currently in Australian schools, will be deported to Nauru? 

