---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 4 February 2016: Malcolm Turnbull's plan for a 15 per cent GST; Scott Morrison's latest thought bubble to hit the super of 9 million Australians; asylum seekers; Malaysia; permanent resettlement; GST compensation erodes over time; Labor's plan to reduce tobacco consumption"
date: "2016-02-04"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "Malcolm Turnbull's plan for a 15 per cent GST"
  - "Scott Morrison's latest thought bubble to hit the super of 9 million Australians"
  - "asylum seekers"
  - "Malaysia"
  - "permanent resettlement"
  - "GST compensation erodes over time"
  - "Labor's plan to reduce tobacco consumption"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/223489181
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4339601%22
---

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW TREASUER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSOP  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  THURSDAY, 4 FEBRUARY 2016   

 Subjects: Malcolm Turnbull’s plan for a 15 per cent GST; Scott Morrison’s latest  thought bubble to hit the super of 9 million Australians; asylum seekers;  Malaysia; permanent resettlement; GST compensation erodes over time; Labor’s  plan to reduce tobacco consumption. 

 CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Well thanks everybody. Today we see the  Turnbull Government in absolute chaos when it comes to their plans for tax. We see the  Liberal Party backbench in revolt over the GST. Let's be very clear; there is one reason  Liberal MPs don't want Scott Morrison to increase the GST, it is because they’re scared  about their seats. The reason the Labor Party doesn't want Scott Morrison to increase  the GST is because we are concerned about the impact on low and middle income  Australians. A very big difference.  

 The Liberal Party might be running scared. Labor is happy to debate the GST. We want  Mr Turnbull and Mr Morrison to come clean on their plans. Bill Shorten and I will debate  them anytime anywhere. Our position on the GST is very very clear; Scott Morrison and  Malcolm Turnbull's is as clear as mud. We know that they want to increase the GST but  they won't say how. They won’t say what it will apply to and they are clearly running  scared of their own Liberal Party/National Party divisions. 

 More chaos when it comes to tax when it comes, in relation to superannuation. Again  Labor last April outlined a clear, costed and well thought-out plan to make our  superannuation tax concessions fairer and more sustainable. Scott Morrison was the  Government’s lead scare campaigner, saying that the Liberal Government would never  touch superannuation, that this was an outrageous attack on the retirement incomes of  Australians. He was in full lather when it came to his scare campaign. Since then he has 

 become Treasurer and he has flagged moving on superannuation tax concessions.  More evidence that he is the Government’s hypocrite-in-chief.  

 And today more modeling out showing that the plans under consideration by the Liberal  National Party Government could affect up to 10 million people, going right down the  income scale, reducing the retirement incomes of middle income Australians. Now the  Labor Party has a plan to make our tax concessions fairer by getting fairer tax from  those with more than $1.5 million in their superannuation accounts and those on more  than $250,000 income a year, well throughout, a proper plan. Scott Morrison thought  bubble attacks people on middle incomes. People who we need to be saving for the  future. People who deserve to have a retirement which is funded through the  superannuation system. This is the inevitable result, both these events; the GST revolt  and the revelations on superannuation, are the inevitable clear result of a Treasurer  who has no framework, a Treasurer who is a hypocrite, a Treasurer who is just not up to  the job.  

 Now Scott's Morrison can clear all this up, he has been in the job now for 140 days. He  can actually announce a policy. Labor has policies announced on multinational tax, on  high income superannuation, on tobacco, on the emissions reduction fund, on the baby  bonus, on not proceeding with the plebiscite on marriage equality. We have all these  policies out there which have a positive impact on the budget bottom line. Scott  Morrison has continual thought bubbles, hypocritical lines of thought. He has a continual  and rolling and contradictory scare campaign from a man simply not up to the task of  being the most senior economic policy maker  in Australia.  

 Well it's about time he actually stopped the thought bubbles, stopped the speculation  and came up with a policy. There is a lot of concern in the Australian economy,  consumer confidence is down. We need to see a Treasurer with a framework, with  clearly thought-out principles and ideas and with detailed policies and then he and I can  get on with the job of debating them right across the country to give the Australian  people a real choice at the next election. Until he does that, until he announces his  policies he has nothing more and nothing less than a series of ill-conceived thought  bubbles which don't add up to an economic policy for the future of Australia.  

 Happy to take some questions 

 JOURNALIST: What do you make of the remarks of Melissa Park on offshore  processing? 

 BOWEN: Melissa's views are well known, she has been consistent in fairness to her on  these issues   for a long long time. These are very difficult issues which get debated in 

 the Labor caucus from time to time. Melissa has expressed her views in the Labor  Caucus as have the rest of us from different perspectives and I'm sure Melissa's views  come as no revelation on this particular matter. 

 JOURNALIST: As the former Immigration Minister what do you think should happen to  the 267 asylum seekers in Australia at the moment who were affected by the high court  ruling yesterday?   

 BOWEN: Look I think the important thing here is that the Government outlines a plan for  the permanent resettlement of these people, a temporary solution for them is not good  enough. The Government has said that they don’t want to resettle them in Australia,  they need to outline the alternatives. They need to engage with the asylum seekers and  refugees about other options. Richard Marles has made that very very clear. Now I must  say I saw reporting this morning and apparently it was said last night that Peter Dutton  refused to allow an arrangement with Malaysia. I mentioned the word hypocritical  before. This would be the most breathtaking hypocrisy on behalf of the Government.  The previous Labor Government had a plan in place which would stop the people  smuggling trade. The Liberal Party engaged in a cynical political exercise to kill it, and  now they are by reports contemplating an arrangement with Malaysia. Well that is just  the most breathtaking piece of hypocrisy. If they have a plan then they should outline it  and I’m sure Richard Marles would respond accordingly.  

 JOURNALIST: You spoke about a bit of confusion over the GST but Labor hasn’t been  entirely on the same page when it comes to some of Jay Wetherill’s thoughts for  example. 

 BOWEN: Well, can I say to you that I have never seen an issue in which the Federal  Shadow Cabinet and the Caucus has been more of one mind that we should not  support an increase in the GST. Not one. Now we understand that Treasurers and  Premiers at the state level are under funding pressures because of Malcolm Turnbull’s  $80 billion worth of cuts to health and education. We’ve made difficult decisions that  have generated $70 billion worth of improvement over the decade to the budget bottom  line in part to fund so far improvements to education funding. Now ‘Your Child. Our  Future.’ Policy - very important to the states which has welcomed by the states. Now  we’ll continue to outline in coming weeks more savings announcements partly to fund  new initiatives and partly to ensure a positive return to the budget bottom line. And I am  very confident that when all those plans are very clear before the Australian people, no  state or territory Labor leader would have any problem endorsing it.  

 JOURNALIST: Do you see the parallels between say GST and giving money back  through tax breaks and so on and the carbon tax [inaudible]. 

 BOWEN: Well, you know again, Malcolm Turnbull and Scott Morrison were members of  a Shadow Cabinet that railed against a carbon price and said you can’t compensate for  a carbon price. Now they are the ones pushing an increase in the GST. Now the thing  about a GST when it comes to compensation - a couple of points - firstly compensation  is temporary when it’s delivered through the tax system. We see that. The Treasurer  goes on about bracket creep. Well, his preferred way of delivering compensation would  be eaten up by bracket creep over time. Secondly, because of Labor’s tripling of the tax  free threshold in office, there are now lots of people outside the tax system who can’t be 

 compensated through tax cuts and who don’t receive government payments. Now one  of the things Scott Morrison is going to have to do when he eventually gets around to  releasing a policy when it’s convenient for him to actually outline some plans in relation  to the GST, when he gets to doing that, when he gets to doing his job, is how he would  compensate those people who are not in the taxation system and not receiving  government payments. I look forward to seeing that.  

 JOURNALIST: But is it worth waiting to see that before you say ‘lock, stock and barrel  there’s no way we’re [inaudible] 

 BOWEN: Well there are matters of principle here, Tom. The increase in the GST would  hit lower and middle income earners and the compensation would be temporary. When  Mr Morrison is up to the job of actually releasing some detail then we can have a proper  debate. We’ve been releasing our policies. It will attract attention and criticism from time  to time. Particular elements of our policies - they won’t be universally popular. Well  we’ve got them out there. We’ve been releasing them. It’s an extraordinary situation that  the Opposition in Australia has more policy on the table, more detailed policies  announced, more costings and funding plans announced, than a government that has  been in office with all of the resources of the Treasury and with the support of  thousands of bureaucrats across many departments than they have been able to deliver  after two and a half years. An extraordinary situation. 

 JOURNALIST: Just on one of those policies - the tobacco excise. Do you consider that  a revenue measure or a health measure?  

 BOWEN: Well we look for measures which are positive for the budget bottom line and  which have a positive social impact. I am very proud of Labor’s policy that has been out  there and announced which will save lives and will also increase Government revenue.  We have a lived experience here. This has been done before. We’ve seen Government  revenue increase and we’ve seen smoking rates come down. Now this is costed by the  Parliamentary Budget Office - independent of the Labor Party, independent of the  Government. It’s easy to throw out one-liners saying ‘Oh I don’t support that costing.’  Well the Parliamentary Budget Office has done the rigorous analysis. They assume a  reduction in smoking rates. That is built into a conservative costing. They assume a  reduction in smoking rates, even more so they assume a greater reduction of smoking  rates in the years the excise goes up. So they have factored that in. That has all been  taken into consideration. Now there is a lot of money that come into budget from the  tobacco excise. Now of course over time we hope that that comes down but that doesn’t  mean that an increase of tobacco excise of around 40 per cent won’t generate positive  impacts on the budget bottom line - of course it will.  

 JOURNALIST: Labor says it’s firmly opposed to the increase in the GST. If an increase  is legislated, would the party commit to repealing it? 

 BOWEN: Well you’re asking me to announce policies for the 2019 election. You’re more  than entitled to ask me policy for the 2016 election. I would suggest to you that asking 

 me out here at the doors of Parliament today for Labor’s policy for the 2019 election is  getting a little ahead of ourselves, not least of which it because assumes that Malcolm  Turnbull would with the next election is not an assumption I am prepared to accept.  

 We might leave it there, guys. Thank you very much.   

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879   

 

 

