---
title: "Transcript of joint doorstop interview: Hobart: 27 April 2016: Port Arthur Twentieth Anniversary Commemoration; Malcolm Turnbull's attack on Medicare and cuts to pathology; Manus Island Detention Centre; Labor's Your Child, Our Future schools policy; election; Labor's Climate Change Action Plan"
date: "2016-04-27"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Port Arthur Twentieth Anniversary Commemoration"
  - "Malcolm Turnbull's attack on Medicare and cuts to pathology"
  - "Manus Island Detention Centre"
  - "Labor's Your Child, Our Future schools policy"
  - "election"
  - "Labor's Climate Change Action Plan"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/227194286
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4527483%22
---

 

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  HOBART  THURSDAY, 27 APRIL 2016 

 SUBJECT/S: Port Arthur Twentieth Anniversary Commemoration; Malcolm  Turnbull’s attack on Medicare and cuts to pathology; Manus Island Detention  Centre; Labor’s Your Child, Our Future schools policy; Election; Labor’s Climate  Change Action Plan.   

 JANE AUSTIN, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR DENISON: Thanks very much for coming  today to Radiology Tasmania and it's my absolute pleasure to welcome the Opposition  Leader Bill Shorten who's with us today, and also Senator Carol Brown and Brian  Mitchell our candidate for the seat of Lyons.  

 We've got some tough work to do as a Labor Government. We've got the Turnbull  Government that is considering making significant health cuts; he's already made  significant cuts to hospital funding. Labor is the party that created Medicare, we will  continue to support Medicare and we will fight to protect Medicare. I'd like to welcome  Bill Shorten to talk further about these cuts today.  

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks very much Jane and good  morning everybody. Before I get on to the issues of Medicare I think it is appropriate  that I make some comments about the terrible anniversary which we're celebrating.    

 Twenty years ago was a day which was a tragedy for Australia. But also out of that  tragedy we produced the very best of the Australian spirit. We came together as a  nation and from our unity we produced gun laws which have served Australians well  ever since. For this we all owe John Howard.  

 Now I'd like to briefly talk about our Medicare concerns and campaign. I'm here with  Jane Austin and Brian Mitchell and Senator Carol Brown because the Labor Party will  never support the privatisation of Medicare. Medicare is a community standard whereby  which Australians judge ourselves. We will not support the partial privatisation of  Medicare; we will not support the destruction of bulk-billing for people seeking blood 

 tests and x-rays. We will not support the GP's being slugged further and further by a  Turnbull Government who has shown no interest in supporting our frontline medical  services.  

 This federal election will be a referendum about the privatisation of Medicare. About the  defence of bulk-billing in Australia and about making sure that in Australia it's your  Medicare card not your credit card that determines the level of health care you get.  Happy to take questions. 

 JOURNALIST: Mr Shorten, if the Government needs to the offer PNG more money to  keep Manus Island open will you support that? 

 SHORTEN: For three years the Turnbull Government and his predecessors have been  ignoring the train wreck we see right now on Manus Island. This Government has  incompetently handled the regional processing of refugees and asylum seekers. Labor  is resolute against the people smugglers. It doesn't matter about Liberal or Labor we  have the same position on opposing the people smugglers. But Minister Dutton and  Prime Minister Turnbull have created a situation, an almost unworkable situation of  semi-permanent, indefinite detention. Minister Dutton said this morning that for months  h

  e's expected this outcome. Minister Dutton said this morning that Prime Minister  Turnbull's been aware of this looming disaster for months. What is it that they should've  done then, which they're now going to do now, this is a mess of the Government's  making and I absolutely expect Minister Dutton to be in PNG sorting this mess out, and I  think it speaks volumes for Prime Minister Turnbull that his own Minister has said that  Prime Minister Turnbull's known this problem's coming and yesterday he said that there  was no roadmap to deal with it. It's a shambles.  

 JOURNALIST: Should they now be moved back to Australian soil for further  processing? 

 SHORTEN: Labor supports regional processing. We do not want to see the people  smugglers back in business. Australians should know and even more importantly  people smugglers should know that after the next election whether or not Labor is  successful or Liberal, there is a unity ticket to defeat the people smugglers. But our  commitment to defeating the people smugglers shouldn't give the green light for a lazy  Liberal Government to maintain a situation of indefinite detention. Prime Minister  Turnbull and Minister Dutton need to make this a first order priority. 

 JOURNALIST: Do you support more money for the PNG Government though? I mean if  that's what they're going to ask for to keep the centre open, will Labor support that? 

 SHORTEN: Well first of all we need to get a proper briefing from the Government. We  all know that this Government's got a mess and all they want to do is blame Labor -  back in 2013. It's not good enough. These guys in the Government have been pulling  down big wages for the last three years to do their day job and now all they can do is  run around like headless chooks and blame the Labor Party. Minister Dutton let the cat  out of the bag this morning, he said he expected this and was aware of this for months.  They need to do their day job and sort out this mess. Labor will not be unreasonable in 

 terms of working with people to sort this mess out. But the Government needs to do  their day job, they've been in charge of Australia for nearly three years and they've said  on television they expected this result, now they're running around without a plan and  it's not good enough.  

 JOURNALIST: There is speculation that the Government could try and more the  asylum seekers to Christmas Island, is that something you'd support?  

 SHORTEN: I'm not going to deal in rumours and innuendo. What amazes me though is  this -  

 JOURNALIST: Surely that's a live option?  

 SHORTEN: Well, sorry but the Government may be briefing you but they’re not briefing  us of that. It is not our job  to do the Government’s job. But we have worked every step  of the way to defeat the people smugglers. I've got a couple of priorities here, to defeat  the people smugglers and keep them out of business and to make sure that people are  not kept in indefinite detention. This Government is risking both.  

 JOURNALIST: State Labor in Tasmania has called for the reopening of the Pontville  Detention Centre down here. Is that something that Federal Labor would entertain?  

 SHORTEN: No.  

 JOURNALIST: Do you anticipate the Government will reveal any gun reform laws in  light of the 20th anniversary today?  

 SHORTEN: Well, I do want to give acknowledgement to John Howard, I think perhaps  this was the signature achievement of his time in Government. As I said today is a  terrible tragedy. 20 years ago unthinkable things happened, people, families, survivors,  the victims remain in our thoughts. I think most Australians probably remember where  they were as the news came through, the horrible news of the Port Arthur massacres.  The anniversary no doubt brings back really unpleasant, difficult memories for survivors  and for people who lost loved ones there. That's my first thought about today. But we  must recognise that out of the tragedy twenty years ago this nation came together, we  saw the best of Australia in the aftermath of Port Arthur. We worked together with a  unity of purpose to secure gun laws which I believe have served Australians well ever  since. And for that I do acknowledge John Howard's work.  

 In terms of gun laws and gun law reforms, there are debates going on about pump  action shot guns at the moment. We will work constructively with the Government on  matters when it comes to the safety of Australians there is complete bipartisanship and I  think that's what Australians deserve to hear. With both Liberal and Labor, it doesn’t  matter if Mr Turnbull's in charge or I'm in charge, we have the same view of the world in  terms of the safety of our fellow Australians.  

 JOURNALIST: Would a Labor Government support and funded the relocation of the  Burnie and Launceston university campuses into the cities?   

 SHORTEN: Good question. We are very committed to properly funding the University of  Tasmania. Tasmanians are lucky having the University of Tasmania. It is a premier  institution of higher education learning throughout Australia. It's been Labor who’s been  standing up against the ruthless cuts of Mr Abbott and now Mr Turnbull to higher  education. People shouldn't forget that the Liberals still have these zombie cuts lurking  in the Senate, where they want to cut funding which would put Burnie and Launceston  campuses under pressure. Making it harder for Tasmanian kids to get the same deal  that mainland kids get. We'll have more to say in the very near future about additional  support for the University of Tasmania. But what I have to again stress is if you care  about Tasmanian kids having the same quality access to higher education, to needs  based school funding and the secondary and primary system, to properly funded public  TAFE education, vote Labor at the next election. My outstanding candidates here are all  committed to improving funding for TAFE, primary, secondary schools and universities  and the way we're going to do it, because Labor's got fully funded policies, is we're  to make multi-nationals pay their fair share. We're going to crackdown on unsustainable  tax concessions for people who have millions in superannuation. We're not going to  waste $160 million on a plebiscite on marriage equality, when the politicians are already  paid to make decisions like that. And we're also going to make sure we stop wasteful  Government spending such as Tony Abbott and now Malcolm Turnbull's fraudulent  policies on climate change, which are paying billions of dollars to large polluters. So,  Tasmanians can know, if you care about the education of your kids, if you care about  the future of higher education, if you care about TAFE education, vote Labor at the next  election.  

 JOURNALIST: There is a double d election on the horizon. Is this a good chance to  move Lisa Singh up the ticket and into a winnable position? 

 SHORTEN: The Tasmanian Labor Party will finalise its Senate ticket. We've got good  candidates running, both in the House of Representatives and in the Senate. I have to  say the most remarkable story which perhaps the mainland hasn't noticed is that the  Eric Abetz conservatives have dumped the most senior Tasmanian Minister, Richard  Colbeck, and now there's all this carry-on about can a Turnbull supporter be somewhere  higher than fifth on the ticket. It just shows you the chaos of the Liberal Party and the  deep divisions in the Tasmanian Liberal division.   

 JOURNALIST: Does Lisa Singh deserve to be in a winnable position?   

 SHORTEN: Lisa Singh is a very good performer, but I'm also going to say that our  Tasmanian Labor Party will decide our Senate preselection and again, what I would say  is we've got very good candidates including Lisa. And Labor's aiming to do as well as  we possibly can at the next election. So we're chasing every vote, that's why we've got  good policies on jobs, schools, Medicare, renewable energy and fair taxation,  and prioritising first home buyers over property speculators. Last question thanks.   

 JOURNALIST: Greg Hunt yesterday labelled that your climate change plan a tax on  electricity, can you guarantee that Tasmanians won't be paying more if you're  successful at the election?   

 SHORTEN: Greg Hunt's got a PhD I think in climate change, I don't know how, you  know, the point about it is that the Liberals are pushing a fraudulent policy. Climate  change is a real challenge to the future of Australia's standard of living. The fact that  we've got global warming leads to more extreme weather events which leads to less  reliable food supplies, it leads to greater insurance costs. Climate change is a real  threat to the cost of living of Australian families and to Australia's economy. Yesterday  Labor was pleased, I was pleased on behalf of Labor, to announce policies which are  science based, which will work and which will make sure that we're doing our bit, not  leading the world but not following the world, in terms of tackling the harmful effects of  climate change. It's grossly irresponsible and fraudulent of the Liberal Party, and Mr  Turnbull himself should know better, to offer policies which are going to take Australia to  the back of the pack. Tasmania's got a very good history in terms of renewable energy.  We want to see Australia grab the renewable energy jobs revolution which is happening  all around the world. It's a little known fact that the rest of the world in the last two years  has added two million jobs, white collar and blue collar jobs very importantly, in terms of  renewable energy.    

 One country has gone backwards,  I'm afraid to say that's Australia under the Liberals.  We've actually lost over 2,500 jobs. Tasmania is well placed to be a hub of renewable  energy development, and under Labor Tasmania can fulfil its jobs future and gain much  needed investment. And in terms of Mr Hunt and his scare campaigns on electricity,  even the Business Council of Australia, who aren't well known for endorsing the Labor  Party's policies, and even a lot of the industries who cover the electrical industry, have  said at last Labor's offering a platform for bipartisan growth in climate change policy.  And indeed, I would invite Mr Turnbull, take my hand of friendship, let's take climate  change off the table as an election issue, let the new Malcolm Turnbull be like the old  Malcolm Turnbull who said he never wanted to lead a party which wasn't committed to  climate change. I invite the old Malcolm Turnbull to come back, step up the centre  stage, work with me, work with the environment, work with the economy, work with  Australian families, and let's take climate change out of the realm of petty partisan right  wing politics and let's put Australia back on the map again when it comes to taking  action.    

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053   

