---
title: "Speech at President Obama's Leaders' Summit on Refugees, New York City, USA"
date: "2016-09-20"
creators:
  - "Turnbull, Malcolm"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/234405735
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4830864%22
---

 

 

 PRIME MINISTER 

 THE HON. MALCOLM TURNBULL MP   

 

 TRANSCRIPT   

 20 September 2016  

 

 Speech at President Obama’s Leaders’ Summit on Refugees  New York City, USA   

 

 E&OE…   

 PRIME MINISTER:  

 The number of displaced people worldwide is now as we have heard at the highest level since the  aftermath of World War II. 

 I commend President Obama and thank him for bringing us together to make new pledges of  commitments to support some of the world’s most vulnerable people. 

 We have heard speeches, presentations today from leaders of some of the countries that are in the  very front line - from Lebanon, from Turkey, from Jordan, from Cameroon and others - and listening  to them is very humbling, recognising the scale of the challenge that they face.  

 It causes us to conclude, I believe, that this complex crisis requires a full spectrum of responses. As  leaders, we are responsible for helping those who are most vulnerable, and restoring the integrity of  migration systems. 

 Australia’s approach is to be both principled and pragmatic. Our strategy addresses all parts of the  problem - employing strong border protection policies, a very tough stance on people smugglers,  while tackling the causes of displacement, with a generous and compassionate resettlement  program supporting refugees in our communities. 

 I wish to highlight two areas of action - dual objectives - for my fellow leaders to consider. 

 First, we need to do more to address the underlying causes of displacement - conflict, instability,  and other vulnerabilities - including providing more assistance, and opportunity, as close to home as  possible. 

 That is why Australia recently announced a $220 million Australian dollar commitment to help the  humanitarian and resilience needs in Syria and its neighbouring countries. 

 And I can announce that Australia will commit an additional $130 million Australian dollars over the  next three years in support of peacebuilding and assistance to refugees, forcibly displaced  communities and host countries. This multi-year commitment will give greater certainty to aid  delivery organisations and facilitate longer-term planning. 

 Second, we must have strong border protection policies that put the people smugglers out of  business. We are all too familiar with the tragedy of lost lives at sea and on land caused by those so  immoral that they are willing to traffic and exploit human desperation. 

 Strong borders are not just about security. They are crucial to ensuring social harmony and public  support for migration domestically, as we have heard from one speaker after another today.  

 Australia is a prime example. Securing our borders has increased public confidence and enabled  Australia to have one of the world’s most generous humanitarian systems.  

 Australia's program of permanent refugee resettlement is the third largest in the world. 

 I am pleased to announce that Australia’s planned increase to almost 19,000 places from mid-2018  will be maintained at this level. This, in addition to the 12,000 places we have committed for  refugees from Syria and Iraq. And these commitments should be considered in the context of our  national population of 24 million.  

 We will also participate in the US-led program to resettle Central American refugees currently in a  resettlement centre in Costa Rica. 

 Australians support these actions because they have confidence that our migration system is well  managed. This confidence is a key pillar on which our successful multicultural society is built.  

 This is the pragmatic and compassionate approach Australia takes to this crisis. We encourage all  nations to focus on practical, long-term solutions to this global problem.  

 I look forward to working with you all.  

 Thank you. 

 [ENDS] 

 

