---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 4 December 2016: Adler shotgun; Donald Trump; Taiwan; refugees resettlement deal"
date: "2016-12-04"
creators:
  - "Turnbull, Malcolm"
source: "PRIME MINISTER"
subjects:
  - "Adler shotgun"
  - "Donald Trump"
  - "Taiwan"
  - "refugees resettlement deal"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/238417420
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4978139%22
---

 

 

 

 PRIME MINISTER 

 THE HON. MALCOLM TURNBULL MP    

  TRANSCRIPT    

 4 December 2016  

  Doorstop  Sydney  

 E&OE…  [Broadcast begins]  PRIME MINISTER: 

 The import ban was put in place pending a decision to classify- reclassify the guns and there has not  been agreement between the states and territories to date. When agreement is reached, then the  import rules will be changed so that they conform with the classification. At the moment, there is a ban  on lever-action guns with a magazine capacity of more than five rounds being imported and so there are  different proposals that have been mentioned.  

 If for example, lever-action guns with a magazine of more than five rounds are classified as Category D,  that would be available to very few users at all, most basically feral pest controllers, generally working  for governments. Anyway, that is where it is. The Federal Government's role is to deal with - we deal  with imports, with the customs power. But the classification of firearms and the regulation of them is a  matter for the states and territories under the National Firearms Agreement. 

 JOURNALIST: 

 Could a buyback be next after that, for the ones that become illegal under a reclassification? 

 PRIME MINISTER: 

 I'm not going to run a commentary or speculate on it. It is very much a matter for the states and  territories. We've imposed the ban. The import ban, we've maintained the ban pending that agreement. 

 JOURNALISTS: 

 [Inaudible] 

 PRIME MINISTER: 

 Yes we've got to go and start a race. 

 JOURNALIST: 

 Has Donald Trump been reckless by jumping on the phone to the President of Taiwan? 

 PRIME MINISTER: 

 Despite considerable encouragement from you and your colleagues, I managed to avoid running a  commentary during the course of the US election and I'm not going to embark on becoming a US politics  commentator now. 

 JOURNALIST: 

 What about the resettlement deal you've got to with the US? 

 PRIME MINISTER: 

 It's a very good arrangement and we are confident that we'll continue through the change of  administration. 

 JOURNALIST: 

 Plans for Christmas, Prime Minister? A reshuffle perhaps? 

 PRIME MINISTER: 

 Thanks very much. Thank you. 

 [ENDS] 

 

