---
title: "Amnesty's credibility shredded"
date: "2016-10-20"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/235876850
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4887611%22
---

 1 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 

 

 The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Federal Member for Dickson  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 20 October 2016   

 AMNESTY’S CREDIBILITY SHREDDED 

 Amnesty International’s credibility has been shredded after its Senior Director of  Research Anna Neistat was caught out making false and misleading claims about  alleged abuse and neglect in regional processing of Illegal Maritime Arrivals in Nauru.   

 Ms Neistat is the author of Amnesty International’s latest “report” on Nauru and regional  processing which alleges widespread abuse, but as with Ms Neistat’s public statements  the report contains a considerable number of unverified claims and presents them as  fact.   

 On Monday Ms Neistat was interviewed on the ABC’s Lateline programme:   

 NEISTAT CLAIM: “I spoke to many children, many of whom talked about wanting to  commit suicide, some of them have.”   

 FACT: No children have committed suicide on Nauru.   

 NEISTAT CLAIM: “The boats haven’t stopped coming, they just don’t sink at the  Australian shore anymore, they are pushed back…..and people do continue to die at  sea.”   

 TODAY’S AUSTRALIAN: “Ms Neistat….conceded….contrary to the impression she  gave….no asylum seekers were known to have drowned trying to reach Australia.”   

 FACT: Since December 2013 there have been no known deaths at sea under  Operation Sovereign Borders.   

 NEISTAT CLAIM: “People also die on Nauru…..They commit suicide.”   

 FACT: There has been one suicide on Nauru since regional processing re-opened in  2012 which was widely reported. There have been two other deaths - an accidental  drowning and a person with a heart condition. 

 2 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

 

 

 Ms Neistat gave several other interviews to the ABC this week and appears to have a  predilection for making statements that she cannot substantiate.   

 ABC 774:  “….some of the most shocking findings go into the rate of suicide….”   

 Then: “People are dying on Nauru….they die from diseases…..”   

 ABC RN: “…the kind of abuses I saw….sexual assault….violent attacks….”…. “Did you  see that?.....I interviewed people…..”   

 Then: “….the most striking feature of what I saw in Nauru is…this level of trauma and  self-harm and suicide is prevalent in children….”   

 “Did you see evidence of self-harm of children? I talked, I mean, I have not seen the  actual physical evidence.”   

 Ms Neistat and her report are difficult to believe.   

 For further information: Minister’s office - (07) 6277 7860 

