---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 20 February 2016: Turnbull Liberals' cuts to Medicare; regional resettlement; Labor's plan to balance the Budget and fund schools and hospitals; Malcolm Turnbull's Government in chaos"
date: "2016-02-20"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Turnbull Liberals' cuts to Medicare"
  - "regional resettlement"
  - "Labor's plan to balance the Budget and fund schools and hospitals"
  - "Malcolm Turnbull's Government in chaos"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/224384887
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4384154%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG    

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  SYDNEY  SATURDAY, 20 FEBRUARY 2016    

 SUBJECT/S: Turnbull Liberals' cuts to Medicare; Regional resettlement;  Labor’s plan to balance the Budget and fund schools and hospitals; Malcolm  Turnb 

 ull’s Government in chaos.    

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: G ood afternoon everybody.     

 Today I am pleased to be attending a rally defending Medicare against the Turnbull  Liberal Government. Medicare is one of the great developments of Australia in the  last 30 years. It is the community standard for healthcare, for Australian health  because it provides universal access to all Australians. When your children are up  late at night with a nagging cough or something worse, it's Medicare which means  that you can go and see a GP even if you have just lost your job or you're working  hard and your pay packet is due tomorrow and you don't have enough money.  Medicare allows all Australians regardless of where they live or their circumstances  to be able to get first class medical care.    

 That is why Labor is determined to make sure that the Liberals' plans for Medicare at  the next election fail. We do not believe it is right that a woman seeking an important  breast scan for cancer, a mammogram, should pay about $85. We don't think it is  right that a young couple excitedly expecting their first child should have to pay  nearly $200 for a ultrasound. We don't think it is right that our fellow Australians who  are diagnosed with skin cancer, battling that big fight, might have to pay up to $1000  for a PET scan.    

 Labor believes that it should be your Medicare card not your credit card which  determines the level of health care in this country. Labor will fight for Medicare, we  will not compromise, we will not support any of the Turnbull Government cuts that  are on the table to Medicare. We will make Medicare one of the big five issues at the  next Federal election.     

 Happy to take questions on Medicare and any other matters.    

 JOURNALIST: On immigration, do you support the Government's efforts to secure  third party countries to take Asylum Seekers?    

 SHORTEN: Absolutely, Labor does. We do support doing something about the  situation on Manus and Nauru. Labor does support regional processing but it has  been shameful under the current Liberal Government that processing times have  blown out to almost 450 days. I think that the Turnbull Liberal Government hasn't  done enough to sit down with other nations in the region to provide a solution for the  people who are in detention in Manus and Nauru. Labor will provide all the support  possible because we want to see this situation resolved.     

 JOURNALIST: Do you think countries like Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines  have adequate health resources, other resources to take in these asylum seekers  and give them a good life?    

 SHORTEN: These are developing societies. They're very important and it just makes  me wish that the Liberal Opposition back when Labor proposed an arrangement with  Malaysia to help regional processing, hadn't along with the Greens party, rejected a  Malaysian solution which would have seen some of the long waiting times we are  seeing now, avoided.  I wish that the Liberals in Opposition were as constructive as  Labor is prepared to be - it might have avoided some of the many deaths and  fatalities we saw at sea.    

 JOURNALIST: So you will work with the Government on getting this policy through?  You'll support them all the way?     

 SHORTEN: When it comes to getting children and people out of indefinite detention,  Labor is up for the battle to make sure that this happens.     

 JOURNALIST: If the negotiations are successful, how do you think Australia will be  perceived internationally?    

 SHORTEN: Well the first thing for me is what are we doing in terms of living up to  our own standards and core beliefs. Australians want to make sure that people are  not exploited by people smugglers, that they are not enticed onto unsafe boats and  drown at sea. But equally, Australians, and I believe many Australians, don't want to  see people start get indefinite detention and where people are indirectly in the care  of Australia we should be should be setting the highest standards possible. That's  why we believe in the Government getting its skates on and having proper  negotiations to have regional resettlement. We would also encourage the Federal  Government to get over its hangups about the United Nations High Commission for  Refugees and work through the UN as well as direct country to country negotiations.     

 JOURNALIST: Will negative gearing - Bill Shorten (sic) said yesterday that your  policy is calculated to reduce the value of your home. What's your response to that?    

 SHORTEN: To be technically accurate, I think it was Malcolm Turnbull not me who  said that. Malcolm Turnbull is just wrong. He was wrong in fact. Malcolm Turnbull  and his Government are unraveling because 160 days ago he justified rolling Tony  Abbott, that he would offer 'new economic leadership'. 160 days on, we are no  clearer to knowing what Mr Turnbull and Mr Morrison would do to help everyday  Australians.  

 Now, we have come up with a clear and sensible proposal to help limit negative  gearing in the future for existing houses. But let me make it really clear, it is not  going to affect property prices - that is an unworthy scare campaign for Mr Turnbull  who vowed to be different to Tony Abbott. Now Malcolm Turnbull is channeling his  inner Tony Abbott.  

 Let's be really clear about what we are saying. One, that if you have existing  negative gearing arrangements, they will be maintained and there will be negative  gearing available for new housing stock in the future. Two, we will want to level the  playing field so that first home owners can compete equality with investors so they  can fulfill the great Australian dream of buying a home. Third, our policy will generate  tens of thousands of jobs in the future and four, we're taking up the serious,  responsible work of repairing the Budget and making sure we can fund our schools  and hospitals.  

 Malcolm Turnbull seems to think the great Australian dream is helping investors  receive a tax subsidy to buy their fifth and sixth house; I know the great Australian  dream is for young people to get their first house. 

 JOURNALIST: What does the ANU's modelling say about your negative gearing  policy? 

 SHORTEN: Independent commentators, right from Jeff Kennett through to ACOSS  through to senior economist and now ANU, have made it clear that our policy will not  affect housing prices, that it's a sensible economic policy.  

 We know that the Government attacking us because they have run out of ideas.  They actually don't know what they want to do Australia and the economy.  

 Only Labor is offering fully funded policies to make sure that we can grow jobs, that  we have got real action for climate change through promoting renewable energy, that  we properly fund our education system and our Medicare system and that we have  fair taxation in this country. I want our children, the children of Australia to be able to  grow up and afford to be able to buy a house not lose out because of some tax break  because Malcolm Turnbull backing vested interest over the dreams of everyday  Australians. 

 Last question? 

 Indeed it was, cheers. 

 ENDS 

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER'S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053 

