---
title: "Coalition controlled committee finds Visa Ban Bill severe and unnecessary"
date: "2016-11-23"
creators:
  - "Neumann, Shayne"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/237768143
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4951764%22
---

 

 THE HON SHAYNE NEUMANN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER  PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR    

 COALITION CONTROLLED COMMITTEE FINDS VISA BAN BILL SEVERE AND  UNNECESSARY    

 The Coalition controlled Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights has  embarrassed the Minister for Immigration and Border Protection Peter Dutton and  called on him to address serious concerns about the Migration Legislation  Amendment (Regional Processing Cohort) Bill 2016 which imposes a lifetime ban on  some refugees ever visiting Australia.    

 The Committee which is chaired by Liberal Member for Moore, Ian Goodenough and  whose membership includes five members of the Liberal Party has released their  Human Rights Scrutiny Report which says:    

 “The proposed ban directly distinguishes the grant of visas between  people who fall within the 'regional processing cohort' and individuals who  do not, which may amount to direct discrimination on the basis of 'other  status'.” Page 16    

 “The bill therefore applies what is likely to be considered an unlawful  penalty for seeking asylum, in contravention of article 31 of the Refugee  Convention.  To penalise those who seek to enter Australia illegally for the  purpose of seeking asylum cannot be a legitimate objective under  international law.”  Page 18    

 “Insofar as the objective of the bill is to 'further discourag[e] persons from  attempting hazardous boat journeys with the assistance of people  smugglers in the future and encourage[e] them to pursue regular migration  pathways instead', the statement of compatibility provides no evidence as  to whether the measure would be effective in pursuing this  objective.”  Page 18    

 “… a visa ban on classes of asylum seekers is a severe measure…” Page  19    

 “Accordingly, on the information available, the proposed ban does not  appear to be compatible with the right to equality and non-discrimination.”  Page 19    

 “The proposed visa ban engages and limits the right to protection of the  family and rights of the child as it would foreseeably operate to separate  families. In this respect, there are a range of circumstances under the  proposed visa ban which may lead to the separation of family  members.”  Page 20    

 This scathing report is further proof that aspects of the lifetime ban bill are ridiculous,  unnecessary and severe.    

 Labor cannot in good conscience support legislation which a Coalition controlled  committee has found to be discriminatory, fails to protect the rights of the family and  a contravention of Australia’s obligations under the Refugee Convention.    

 WEDNESDAY, 23 NOVEMBER 2016    

 MEDIA CONTACT: MELISSA HOCKEY 0418 511 529   

 

