---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Sydney: 27 December 2016: Malcolm Turnbull's latest excuse for inaction on housing affordability; Coalition-Greens deal on 1 January pension asset test changes; Newspoll; asylum seeker death"
date: "2016-12-27"
creators:
  - "Bowen, Chris"
source: "SHADOW TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "Malcolm Turnbull's latest excuse for inaction on housing affordability"
  - "Coalition-Greens deal on 1 January pension asset test changes"
  - "Newspoll"
  - "asylum seeker death"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/239619344
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5023679%22
---

 

 CHRIS BOWEN MP 

 ACTING LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON    

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  SYDNEY  TUESDAY, 27 DECEMBER 2016   

 SUBJECT/S: Malcolm Turnbull’s latest excuse for inaction on housing  affordability; Coalition-Greens deal on 1 January pension asset test changes;  Newspoll; aylum seeker death     

 CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW TREASURER: Well thanks for coming out everybody, I  hope you’ve had a great Christmas.     

 Those Australians hoping that Malcolm Turnbull might turn a new leaf for 2017, they  will be today, bitterly disappointed. The Turnbull Government has been marked by  excuses from the Prime Minister about what he can’t do.     

 Now today, he’s acknowledged that there is a housing affordability crisis, but has  said that it’s not his fault, not the fault of the State Premiers, but the fault of the  Mayors and local councillors of Sydney in particular.    

 It seems that Malcolm Turnbull is prepared to take responsibility for absolutely  nothing. If only he had a job where he could do something, like Prime Minister for  example!     

 Across the country, around Australia, families have gotten together, talking about  their hopes and dreams for 2017. And for many young people, in particular, their  main aspiration is to buy a house, to buy a home. It is getting further and further out  of reach. Now, of course, federal, state and local governments all need to be working  together. Of course, housing supply is one of the factors that goes into housing  affordability. But the Prime Minister and the Treasurer have a big lever at their  disposal and that is called the tax system.    

 We have in Australia one of the most generous tax concessions for property  investors in the world. We have more tax support for people buying their sixth, 

 seventh or eighth properties then we do for people looking to buy their first home.  Malcolm Turnbull thinks that is A-okay.     

 It is time for Malcolm Turnbull to accept that he is the Prime Minister and he has both  the responsibility and the power to do something about this.    

 The problem for Malcolm Turnbull that housing construction is running at an all-time  high in NSW and Rob Stokes, the Planning Minister in NSW, pointed this out just a  few weeks ago. Rob Stokes and Mike Baird have called Malcolm Turnbull and Scott  Morrison out on this. They know that negative gearing reform is part of the solution.  That negative gearing reform must be part of the solution to the housing affordability  crisis in Australia. They know that. Young Australians wondering and hoping for a  first home know that. Parents and grandparents wondering how their children and  grandchildren will afford to buy their first home, know it as well.    

 This is a Prime Minister who was a member of the Government who abolished the  Housing Supply Council and now he bemoans that local councils aren’t doing their  jobs. Well I tell you who is not doing their job, the Prime Minister and Treasurer of  Australia.     

 Happy to take some questions.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you agree with him that some councils are taking too long to  approve development applications?     

 BOWEN: Some councils can do better, there is no doubt about that. You also need  to look at all of the factors. Now some councils, for example, almost all of their  housing approvals would be to replace existing housing, knocking down an old  house to build a new house. That’s not really adding to housing supply in a way that  will deal with housing affordability. As we know, in NSW, there are large swathes of  new housing stock coming online, and housing construction is at an all-time high,  record highs.    

 Now what we are seeing is Malcolm Turnbull finding any excuse. Now of course, if a  council can process applications more quickly, that’s a good thing for everyone  involved, getting the balance right. But to say that that is the only thing that any level  of government can do for housing affordability in Australia is a sick joke.     

 JOURNALIST: Turning to the Newspoll in the Oz today, the Government’s standing  amongst seniors has dropped by 7 percentage points since the 2nd of July. You must  be pleased with that with two-thirds of those voters swinging to Labor?    

 BOWEN: Well I don’t think Australians need a Newspoll, with all due respect to  Newspoll, to tell them that Malcolm Turnbull is out of touch and older Australians  know that more than anyone else. The changes that come in to force on 1 January,  for example, in a deal done by the Greens and the Liberal Party. That’s an example  of the sorts of policies put in place by Malcolm Turnbull. Now he was not quick to  point that out at the time, but older Australians have seen that coming, more and  more as the 1st of January approaches. There will be many issues that go into that 

 drop of support. The Labor Party will stick to its job of providing the alternative,  holding the Government to account and providing alternative policies.     

 JOURNALIST: Those saving measures, the changes to the pension asset test, were  savings you took to the last election?    

 BOWEN: Well the Liberals and the Greens voted for them. Now we made it clear  that we couldn’t repair all of the damage from the deal the Greens and Liberals had  done. The Liberals and the Greens voted for it. This is not something that we would  have done in Government, and it’s very clear that when the Liberals and Greens vote  together, sometimes it’s very difficult to repair the damage.     

 JOURNALIST: Would you say that those automatic messages that are being played  to older people by the ACTU, that that is something behind the drop in popularity of  the Coalition?    

 BOWEN: I think there would be a whole range of factors. That older Australians  together with Australians right across the board, in different states and territories and  age brackets, have been disappointed with Malcolm Turnbull’s performance for  some time.      

 JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)    

 BOWEN: To go to your question directly, the Opposition expresses its condolences  for the recent death on Manus Island. We would hope and encourage the  Government to provide every bit of information on the tragedy to the Australian  people as soon as possible. Labor has instigated a Senate inquiry into medical care  in offshore detention. My understanding is that that reports in March. Every death is  a tragedy. We would of course hope and expect that every assistance was given in  this insistence, but there is a possibility for, as I understand it, for a Queensland  coronial inquiry and I would imagine that that would take place, and hope that any  changes after that could be made. First and foremost, our condolences go to all of  those involved. Any death in offshore detention is one too many and is a tragedy.     

 Okay? Thank you.    

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES CULLEN 0409 719 879 

 

