---
title: "Youth to benefit from innovative approaches to help them into work"
date: "2016-03-04"
creators:
  - "Cash, Michaelia"
source: "MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/224849977
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4407826%22
---

 

 Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT  MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE 

 SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA  

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 4 March 2016 

 

 YO



 UTH TO BENEFIT FROM INNOVATIVE APPROACHES TO  HELP THEM INTO WORK   

 Consistent with the Governments focus on jobs and ensuring our youth are job ready, the  Government today announced the first organisations to deliver the new Empowering YOUth  I 

 nitiatives. These organisations will provide a range of new and innovative ways to help  vulnerable young people into sustainable employment.  

 Mi



 nister for Employment, Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash, today visited Headspace in  Da  ndenong with Liberal candidate for Bruce, Helen Kroger, to announce the successful  or

  ganisations under round one of the programme. 

 “Organisations such as Headspace have thought outside the box to come up with innovative  ways to engage in a young person’s life at a time when they are at a crossroads and at risk of  fa 

 lling into welfare dependency,” Minister Cash said. 

 “



 Young Australians are at a stage in their lives when their potential is immense and they have  a lifetime of gainful employment in front of them - policies and programmes must be  im 

 plemented to ensure they do not enter a cycle of long term unemployment.” 

 Headspace is one of the 20 innovative organisations selected through a highly competitive  grant process to deliver Empowering YOUth Initiatives.  

 Ea



 ch of these organisations was selected for their experience and their innovative approaches  to engage young people and help them break through obstacles that are limiting their job  prospects. 

 “Youth unemployment, both globally and in Australia, is unacceptably high,” Minister Cash  sa  id. 

 “



 We know that early intervention is fundamental, particularly for those who need additional  support to become more competitive in the job market.” 

 CM15-000071  

 The Coalition Government is focused on providing the right mix of services and support  under the Australian Government’s $331 million Youth Employment Strategy, announced in  the 2015-16 Budget, to tackle youth unemployment. 

 “



 Governments must always be willing to look at innovative approaches. I am pleased to see  these approaches being  tested to help more young people start and keep job.” 

 Empowering YOUth Initiatives will support measures from not-for-profit and non-government organisations to help long-term unemployed young people, or those at risk of  long-term unemployment, to find and stay in employment. Further rounds will be announced  mid-

  year. 

 For more information on Empowering YOUth Initiatives and other support available for  young people under the Government’s Youth Employment Strategy visit:  htt 

 p://www.employment.gov.au/youth 

 Attachment - Successful organisations under Round 1 

 Media contacts:  Office of Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash: (02) 6277 7320 / Brooke Vitnell 0447 743 835  Department Media: media @employment.gov.au 

 

 

 CM15-000071  

 ATTACHMENT 

 Successful Empowering YOUth Initiative Organisations 

 The organisations to be offered an opportunity to deliver Empowering YOUth Initiatives  under the first round are:   

 

 Organisation  Assistance Participants 

 Headspace National Youth  Mental Health Foundation  Ltd (VIC including regional  centres)   

 Current intensive vocational assistance  is to be expanded through a digital  platform and an integrated primary  health care setting including access to  mental health clinicians. 

 Young Indigenous people, early  school leavers and young people  in regional centres with mild to  moderate mental health issues. 

 Workforce Plus Inc  (Broadmeadows, Colan and  national sites) 

 Exposing young people to work related  skills and simulation training through  an interactive multi-media game and  followed with work experience to put  learning into practice. 

 Indigenous and culturally and  linguistically diverse young  people, rurally isolated young  people, young people with  disabilities and early school  leavers. 

 Geelong Ethnic Communities  Council Inc (Barwon region -  Geelong and surrounding areas)   

 A 12 month programme delivered over  five phases providing a mix of  individual and targeted support,  training and participant matching with  industry mentors. 

 Culturally and linguistically  diverse young people including  refugees and young people still  in school. 

 Western BACE Limited  (Brimbank and Melton)  Partnering with Microsoft to provide  training and work experience in ICT. 

 This includes mentoring, support and  paid traineeships with corporate  partners. 

 Young people from  disadvantaged backgrounds. 

 Graceades Community  Cottage (South West and  Western Sydney) 

 Filling a gap in the construction  industry by providing a mix of  industry-based training while  addressing barriers using work-related  training and support.  For example,  using workplace health and safety  learning to address literacy issues. 

 Indigenous and culturally and  linguistically diverse young  people and socially  disadvantaged young people. 

 NSW Business Chamber  (NSW regional areas)  An employer led initiative to address  the gap between current career advice 

 and what employers need.  The mobile  hub will focus on areas with low  school retention rates and disengaged  youth. 

 Young people in regional NSW,  Indigenous young people and  early school leavers (or  disengaged students in years 9  to 12). 

 Settlement Services  International (South West  Sydney and Greater Western  Sydney) 

 Focussing on helping young migrants  and refugees to keep their jobs  including by working with employers  to break down cultural barriers  preventing sustained employment. 

 Recently arrived culturally and  linguistically diverse migrants  or refugees. 

 Kings Community (Redfern,  Canterbury Bankstown,  Blacktown and Parramatta) 

 Utilising the high profile role models  from Sydney Kings to encourage  disengaged young people through a  mix of events, coaching and  mentoring, job placements and  leadership programmes. 

 Recently arrived culturally and  linguistically diverse migrants  or refugees. 

 CM15-000071  

 Organisation  Assistance Participants 

 Kiama Community College  (Wollongong, Shellharbour,  Nowra, Goulburn and  Queanbeyan   

 Access to supported training and paid  work to encourage interest and  employability in the ICT area through  the Digital Business Hub social  enterprise. 

 Young people with Aspergers or  related conditions.   

 Brisbane Broncos Rugby  League (Ballina and Lismore)   

 The positive brand of the Brisbane  Broncos is used to increase school  retention rates and the employment  prospects for disengaged young  people. This is through a mix of case  management (including families),  skills training, careers assistance and  intensive support. 

 Indigenous young people and  early school leavers. 

 Fraser Coast Training  Employment Support Service  (Gympie, Maryborough, Hervey  Bay/Pialba, Bundaberg,  Biddenden/Gayndah and  Cherbourg) 

 A social enterprise providing young  people with work experience and  training through a driver business  school. Young people are encouraged  to earn their driver’s licence through  attendance and progress in the  programme. 

 Young people from  disadvantaged and Indigenous  backgrounds. 

 United Synergies (Sunshine  Coast)  A mix of face-to-face and technology  approaches to address employment 

 needs of young people in regional  centres. This 12 week programme also  encourages young people to support  each other to supplement support also  available from coaches and employers. 

 Indigenous and culturally and  linguistically diverse young  people, young people from  jobless families, young parents  and young offenders and early  school leavers. 

 YMCA Perth and Community  Services (South Hedland,  Geraldton, Narrogin and  Albany)   

 Building employability by focusing on  a respected role within the community:  life-saving. Graduates will be  guaranteed an offer of casual  employment.  

 Indigenous young people.   

 White Lion (Perth -  Cullacabardee, Balga,  Mirrabooka, Ballajura,  Girrawheen, Koondoola,  Midland and Midvale)   

 Mix of training and work experience  (within an urban Indigenous  community and a social enterprise  business). The initiative targets two  groups with a history of local tension  with the expectation that, by working  and learning together, a positive flow- on effect will occur within the  community. 

 Young people from Indigenous  and culturally and linguistically  diverse backgrounds. 

 Colony 47 Inc (Glenorchy,  New Norfolk, Huonville and  Sorell)   

 Improving employment skills through  youth driven projects that contribute to  the local community - developing  skills while changing community and  employer perceptions of young people.    

 Disadvantaged young people. 

 Big hART Incorporated  (Northwest TAS)   

 Using art, digital technologies and  performance platforms to increase  employability and community  connections for young people in rural  areas and young women living with  family violence.   

 Young people in disadvantaged  communities particularly young  women.   

 CM15-000071  

 Organisation  Assistance Participants 

 Great Southern Employment  Development Committee  (Albany and Katanning) 

 Utilising social enterprises and  intensive development programmes to  change employment expectations of  young people in regional centres. That  is, moving from low-paid, low-skilled  occupations through to valued and  sustainable employment (for example,  interpreters and translators within the  community). 

 Young people from culturally  and linguistically diverse  backgrounds. 

 Brain Injury SA (Adelaide) An intensive 10 week programme to  assist young people with acquired  brain injury with strategies and  practices to overcome related issues  and to plan for and develop achievable  employment goals. Support includes  mentors who are also living and  working with the same injuries.  

 Young people identified or  diagnosed with brain injuries. 

 Eyre Futures (Eyre Peninsula  including Port Lincoln, Whyalla  and Ceduna)   

 Cultural on Country retreats with  Aboriginal leaders to develop cultural  identity, self-confidence, pride and  self-reliance for disengaged youth and  builds upon traditional work  experience specific to the needs of  remote young people. 

 Young Indigenous people, 

 Northern Joblink Limited  (Palmerston NT)   

 An early intervention, three-stage  approach (coaching/mentoring, project  based learning and post placement  support) to attain life-long working  skills and knowledge. This includes  connecting with communities and local  industries to build resilience and  confidence. 

 15-19 year olds who have  disengaged from school within  the previous 13 weeks.   

 

 

