---
title: "Labor affirms its boat policy failure"
date: "2016-08-24"
creators:
  - "Dutton, Peter"
source: "MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/232947687
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4776870%22
---

 

 

 The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 24 August 2016   

 LABOR AFFIRMS ITS BOAT POLICY FAILURE   

 Labor’s absolute failure to have a coherent border protection policy - eight years after  they threw open Australia’s borders to the people smugglers - was on show again  today.   

 Bill Shorten cannot give a straight answer.   

 Asked three times by three different journalists today to confirm if he would send  anyone from regional processing centres to New Zealand, he was left to obfuscate and  totally failed to address this important issue.   

 Mr Shorten spent every day before the election saying Labor had a border protection  plan - insisting it was the same as the Coalition’s. Yet, he has confirmed every day  since the election that Labor has no plan.   

 Mr Shorten either doesn’t understand the importance of policies which deter vulnerable  people undertaking dangerous journeys on people smuggling boats or he is recklessly  playing politics with people’s lives.   

 Labor and Mr Shorten have learned nothing from their failures.   

 The legacy left from the Rudd-Gillard Labor year’s - 30,000 unprocessed illegal arrivals  in Australia, several thousand more in regional processing centres established by Mr  Rudd - will take this Government and future governments years to deal with.   

 The Coalition Government has stopped the boats, but cleaning up the totality of the  crisis Labor created at our borders, in detention centres and in the Australian  community is an ongoing challenge.   

 Mr Shorten and Labor cannot be trusted on border security.   

 Further information: Minister’s Office - 02 6277 7860   

 

 

 

 1 

 www.minister.border.gov.au 

