---
title: "Labor and Greens jeopardise refugee outcomes"
date: "2016-05-18"
creators:
  - "Liberal Party of Australia"
source: "LIBERAL PARTY OF AUSTRALIA"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/228179029
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4573467%22
---

 MAY 18 2016

 Labor and Greens jeopardise refugee outcomes

 Labor and Mr Shorten's arbitrary doubling of Australia's Refugee and

 Humanitarian Programme is all about politics and was a crass attempt to

 win over the left on boat turn backs.

 About 70 per cent of Australia's migration programme is made up of skilled

 migrants and Australia’s annual net migration figure is approximately

 190,000.

 In addition under the Refugee and Humanitarian Programme we accept

 13,750 people per year. We provide services to applicants who by definition

 come from war-torn countries and situations where people face

 persecution.

 Our Government provides significant funding on settlement services to help

 people within the humanitarian and refugee programme with services such

 as education, training, accommodation, English language lessons and

 trauma counselling.

 Our programme grows gradually from 13,750 per annum. Labor’s decision

 to just double the figure was done solely for political purposes. There was

 no science in doubling the figure - it was purely done to try to win over the

 Left during the debate at ALP conference on boat turnbacks.

 Here are the facts on people coming in through the Refugee and

 Humanitarian Programme:

 44 per cent of the female arrivals and 33 per cent of males do not

 understand spoken English prior to arrival

 23 per cent of female arrivals and 17 per cent of males are illiterate in

 their own language

 15 per cent have never attended school

 46 per cent have never undertaken paid work

 Data from the Building a New Life in Australia study, the Longitudinal Study

 of Humanitarian Migrants (BLNA) which remains ongoing, indicates that

 humanitarian entrants face considerable economic and social challenges to

 settling successfully in Australia. The BNLA found humanitarian settlers fill

 low skill and low paid occupations.

 Other studies have found that humanitarian entrants generally have poorer

 employment outcomes than other migrants, particularly in their early years

 of settlement.

 The Australian Census Migrants Integrated Dataset shows that for

 humanitarian entrants 32 per cent are recording as being ‘in the labour

 force’ while 45 per cent were ‘not in the labour force’. The Australian

 Bureau of Statistics found that in March the general Australian population

 had a Labour Force Participation Rate of 65 per cent.

 The Personal Income Tax Migrants Integrated Dataset indicates

 humanitarian visa holders reported income of around $25,000 well below

 the national average of just under $50,000 for Australian taxpayers.

 During the data matching period less than 20 per cent of these

 humanitarian migrants submitted a tax return.

 What this shows is that it is vital to be able to provide the housing,

 employment, health and integration services that provide the base for these

 migrants to build a new, happy, healthy and successful life in our country -

 a process that can take years, even a generation.

 A doubling of the Refuge and Humanitarian Programme annually as

 committed to by Labor would cost an estimated $2.5 billion dollars over the

 four year period of the Forward Estimates.

 The Greens proposal to quadruple the intake to 50,000 annually would

 come at an estimated cost of $7 billion dollars over the Forward Estimates.

 Australia is already one of the most generous nations in resettling refugees.

 We rank in the top three nations for providing permanent resettlement of

 those most in need from around the world.

 Refugees and humanitarian entrants are selected not because they have

 skills, but because they face persecution or serious discrimination. Many

 will have been denied basic services such as health and education in their

 own country and will have suffered trauma or torture for years.

 Given those circumstances, we should not be surprised that entrants under

 the Refugee and Humanitarian Programme need considerable and

 specialist long term support to settle into our country.

 That is why the Government is committed so strongly to funding settlement

 services, but it comes at a cost.

 The size and composition of the Refugee and Humanitarian Programme is

 carefully considered annually to ensure sufficient resources are available to

 successfully process and integrate those fleeing persecution.

 The Labor/Greens proposals risk jeopardising settlement outcomes.

 Australians support an organised migration programme; Australia is a nation

 of immigrants.

 But the programme needs to remain manageable and acceptable to

 maintain that support from the broad Australian population. Australia has

 proudly and successfully resettled more than 825,000 refugees and others

 in humanitarian needs since World War II and we have the capacity to

 continue this generosity in a managed process.

 To assert that virtually overnight you can double (Labor) or quadruple (The

 Greens) - on an annual basis - this intake of vulnerable people with many

 special needs is the height of irresponsibility and jeopardises the current

 community support for the refugee programme.

 One only has to look at the influx of more than 50,000 people illegally on

 boats during the last Labor Government to see how unrealistic both the

 Labor and Greens proposals are.

 The Department of Immigration and Border Protection will take at least the

 next three years to simply process these people.

 The special intake of 12,000 Syrians and Iraqis from the war-torn Middle

 East will take a number of programme years, simply because we cannot cut

 corners in regards to the various checks, but particularly security checks,

 that we must carry out on people before we offer them the opportunity to

 resettle in Australia. The Government has committed over $800 million to

 this special intake alone.

 We live in a dangerous and uncertain world in terms of security and we

 need appropriate processes in place to ensure we are assisting those most

 in need with the least prospect of returning to their previous lives.

 One only has to look at the recent events in Europe to realise that secure

 borders and organised migration are vitally important to the security of any

 nation.

 Only the Coalition is committed to strong border protection policies to keep

 Australia as safe and secure as is possible.

