---
title: "800 days with no illegal boat arrivals"
date: "2016-10-10"
creators:
  - "Broad, Andrew"
source: "Office of BROAD, ANDREW, MP"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/235376813
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/4868896%22
---

 Media Release  Andrew Broad  Member for Mallee 

 Email     andrew.broad.mp@aph.gov.au     Media contact:  Kirsten Lloyd 

 Web       www.andrewbroad.com  Email   kirsten.lloyd@aph.gov.au  

 Phone    1300 131 620   Phone   0418 445 233 

 

 Monday, 10 October 2016  

 800 DAYS WITH NO ILLEGAL BOAT ARRIVALS 

 The Member for Mallee, Andrew Broad, has welcomed this month’s milestone which marks 

 800 days since the last people-smuggling boat arrived in Australian waters. 

 “I believe that reaching 800 days without one successful people smuggling operation in 

 Australia, is a testimony to the integrity of our Government’s border protection policy. 

 “Our strong and consistent response to national security has meant an end to desperate 

 people risking and losing their lives, at the hands of smugglers and it has also enabled the 

 removal of children from detention.  

 “We have brought the people smuggling trade in our region to an end and in doing so, we’ve 

 been able to increase our intake of refugees through our Humanitarian Programme, which 

 supports those who genuinely need our help and who are applying through the correct 

 channels.” 

 The Humanitarian Programme is guided by the United Nations Human Rights Convention and 

 as of 2018 Australia will redouble its intake of compassionate refugees to 18,750 places 

 annually.  

 This is on the back of the 2015-16 intake which saw Australia issue 15,552 visas, making it 

 the largest offshore programme in more than 30 years. 

 “Australia is a compassionate country, with a proud tradition of welcoming displaced people 

 from around the world, to its shores. However, we must always remain cognisant of our 

 national security obligations and I believe this Government has struck a good balance from 

 which we can move forward.” 

 Mr. Broad said he is a strong supporter of immigration, believing it can deliver both economic 

 and cultural benefits to the country. 

 “Having immigration policy that supports integration and seeks to job-match migrants to 

 regions can boost our own economy and help to address areas of skills shortage whilst 

 providing help to people in need.” 

 Mr. Broad has previously been outspoken on issues around foreign aid and immigration 

 policy, only recently advocating for the importance of Safe Haven Enterprise Visas (SHEV) 

 and the potential gains the SHEV offer electorates such as the Mallee. 

 

 Media Release  Andrew Broad  Member for Mallee 

 Email     andrew.broad.mp@aph.gov.au     Media contact:  Kirsten Lloyd 

 Web       www.andrewbroad.com  Email   kirsten.lloyd@aph.gov.au  

 Phone    1300 131 620   Phone   0418 445 233 

 

 He expressed frustration with the Victorian State Labor Government over its delay in signing 

 off on the SHEV agreement, despite broad community support for the scheme and he called 

 on the State Government to formalise the agreement as a priority. 

 “We want people to come to Australia the right way and once they’re here, we must ensure 

 that we have migration programmes set in place to support their transition.” 

 ENDS 

 

 

 

