---
title: "Dutton's incompetence on display for all to see"
date: "2017-10-24"
creators:
  - "Neumann, Shayne"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/251268908
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5592604%22
---

 

 SHAYNE NEUMANN MP 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR    

 DUTTON’S INCOMPETENCE ON DISPLAY FOR ALL TO SEE   

 Peter Dutton's incompetence has been confirmed by his failure to adequately manage  offshore processing centres or secure other third country resettlement arrangements.   

 The Manus Island Regional Processing Centre must close in 7 days on 31 October due  to a ruling made by the PNG Supreme Court.    

 The Department of Immigration and Border Protection has admitted in Senate  Estimates that alternative accommodation in PNG won't be completed until 29 October  and contracts worth between $150-250m to provide basic services in PNG after 31  October are yet to be signed. 

 

 Senator Carr: “Are you saying the accommodation, the 700 beds (on Manus), 

 aren’t actually ready? Aren’t actually available?” 

 Deputy Commissioner Mandy Newton: “At this point in time, no, all of those 

 beds are not ready. We expect that they will be ready by the 29th.” 

 

 Senator Carr: “Can I ask what’s the total cost of that support?  

 Deputy Commissioner: “The total cost at this point in time isn’t finalised 

 because we’re completing contracts at this time.” 

 Carr: “You must have some idea of budget.” 

 Deputy Commissioner: “I’d estimate it at somewhere between 150 and 250 

 million.” 

 

 The contracts for services in Nauru after 31 October also haven’t been finalised, with  Dutton’s Department failing to follow the Auditor General’s recommendations to conduct 

 open tender processes - which ensure value for money and basic service delivery  standards will be met.   

 Senator Carr: “Was that (the contract) undertaken by tender?” 

 Assistant Commissioner David Nockles: “Limited tender.” 

 Carr: “Limited to who?” 

 Assistant Commissioner: “Canstruct.” 

 Carr: “To one?” 

 Assistant Commissioner: “Correct.” 

 

 Estimates confirmed that the Department is yet to replace its Chief Medical Officer and  Surgeon General following his resignation, meaning thousands of people across  Australia’s onshore and offshore immigration network are still without an advocate to  ensure medical care is based on the best medical advice.   

 Secretary Pezzullo couldn’t even remember if Peter Dutton had been briefed on the  Chief Medical Officer’s resignation.   

 Secretary Pezzullo: “I’d have to recall whether I mentioned it to him in passing. 

 These are matters for the Department, it’s not really a matter for the Minister.” 

 

 Manus Island and Nauru were set up as regional transit facilities but have become  places of indefinite detention because of the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s failure to  secure other third country resettlement options.   

 Peter Dutton needs to accept responsibility for the mess he has made in Manus and  Nauru, get on with his job, and negotiate other third country resettlement options for  eligible refugees.   

 Australia deserves better than this incompetent Immigration Minister who isn’t even  briefed about some of the most important details of his Department.   

 How can Dutton be trusted with Home Affairs when he can’t even do his current job?    

 TUESDAY, 24 OCTOBER 2017    

 MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110 (NEUMANN)   

