---
title: "AFP and NSWPF investigate reported human trafficking and sexual servitude of teen"
date: "2017-05-19"
creators:
  - "Australian Federal Police"
  - "NSW Police"
source: "AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL POLICE"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/246517355
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5284735%22
---



 19



 /



 05



 /



 2017

  AFP and NSWPF investigate reported human trafficking and  sexual servitude of teen



 afp.gov.au



 /news-media/media-releases/afp-and-nswpf-investigate-reported-human-trafficking-and-sexual-



 servitude



 This is a joint media release between the Australian Federal Police and the NSW Police Force.



 Police are appealing for information to identify a ‘Good Samaritan’ who assisted a teenager in fear for her life in



 Sydney last month.



 On Thursday 27 April 2017, a 17-year-old girl, a Guinean National, presented at the Asylum Seeker Centre on



 Bedford Street, Newtown, seeking assistance.



 The girl told staff she was driven to the location by a woman who picked her up after she escaped from a house,



 where she had been held captive and regularly sexually assaulted.



 Following consultation with the Anti-Slavery Unit at the University of Technology, Sydney, the girl was taken to Royal



 Prince Alfred Hospital for treatment.



 The Australian Federal Police (AFP) and NSW Police Force (NSWPF) were contacted and commenced



 investigations into the circumstances surrounding the girl’s arrival into Australia and the reported incidents since that



 time, including sexual assaults.



 Investigators have been told the girl met a man in her home country, Guinea, in January, who offered to bring her to



 Australia to work as his cleaner.



 In early April, the girl travelled with him from Guinea to Sydney, flying via Paris, which took a number of days.



 After arriving in Sydney, the man drove her to house at an unknown location - believed to be in the Sydney



 Metropolitan area - where she was kept in a room and sexually assaulted by a number of men.



 In the early hours of Thursday 27 April 2017, the girl managed to escape from the house and ran until she was



 picked up by an unknown woman, who drove her to the Newtown centre.



 Following treatment, the girl was place into the care of Family and Community Services (FACS).



 The AFP’s Human Trafficking Unit is continuing their inquiries to determine when the girl arrived in Australia, and



 identify the man with which she travelled.



 Specialist detectives from the NSWPF State Crime Command’s Sex Crimes Squad are investigating under Strike



 Force Stockall, and appealing for information that may assist with their inquiries.



 In particular, they are seeking to identify and locate the woman who assisted the girl and drove her to the Asylum



 Seeker Centre.



 It is believed her name is ‘Nicole’ and she drives a small red car, possibly a hatchback.



 Investigators are also keen to speak with anyone who may have seen or heard the girl after she escaped from the



 home.



 Anyone who has information that may assist with any aspect of these investigations is urged to contact Crime



 Stoppers or 131 AFP (131 237).



 1/2



 Police are urging anyone with information in relation to this incident to call Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000 or use



 the Crime Stoppers online reporting page: 



 https://nsw.crimestoppers.com.au/



  Information you provide will be treated



 in the strictest of confidence. We remind people they should not report crime information via our Facebook and



 Twitter pages.



 



 Media Enquires:



 AFP National Media: (02)6131 6333



 NSW Police Force: (02) 8835 8339



 



 Subscribe 



 and receive email alerts



  when new media releases are published here: 



 https://www.afp.gov.au/news-



 media/media-releases



 2/2

