---
title: "Humanitarian assistance to Africa"
date: "2017-05-29"
creators:
  - "Bishop, Julie"
source: "MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/247041650
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5305280%22
---

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

 The Hon Julie Bishop MP 

 

 29 May 2017 

 HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE TO AFRICA   

 Today I announce that the Australian Government will provide further assistance to the  millions of people across Africa forced from their homes, with more than ten million  estimated to be on the verge of starvation due to ongoing conflict and widespread  drought.   

 An additional $19.3 million in support will provide emergency food, healthcare, water and  sanitation to people in South Sudan, Ethiopia, Uganda, Nigeria and Kenya.     

 This new funding will bring our contribution towards the international response to  conflict, drought and famine in Africa to approximately $68 million since July 2016.    

 More than 5.8 million people in South Sudan are in need of assistance due to conflict and  acute food shortages. Australia will provide support through the International Committee  of the Red Cross and the South Sudan Humanitarian Fund to help meet the food, health  and protection needs of these people.     

 Australia’s funding to Uganda and Ethiopia will help these countries work with the United  Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to meet the humanitarian needs of more than  800,000 South Sudanese refugees and others fleeing conflict in the region. Our funding  will also support longer term education and livelihood opportunities for refugees and their  host communities.    

 Our assistance will also help the World Food Programme and Red Cross meet the needs of  over 7 million people at risk of starvation in northeast Nigeria due to ongoing conflict and  drought, including 1.4 million acutely malnourished children.   

 In Kenya, Australia’s funding through UNICEF will help to address the food and water  needs of more than 2.7 million people who are affected by drought and have fled conflict  in neighbouring countries.    

 This new package of assistance supplements Australia’s regular funding to United Nations  Central Emergency Response Fund and humanitarian organisations to respond to  humanitarian crises globally, including in Africa.    

 Foreign Minister’s Office:  Rachel Obradovic 0478 488 874  Phoebe Nolan 0408 275 340 

