---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Strathfield South High School, Sydney: 24 June 2017: Malcolm Turnbull's unfair cuts to schools; Bali bombing charge; Liberal Party delegate comments; Scott Morrison"
date: "2017-06-24"
creators:
  - "Plibersek, Tanya"
source: "DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Malcolm Turnbull's unfair cuts to schools"
  - "Bali bombing charge"
  - "Liberal Party delegate comments"
  - "Scott Morrison"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/248731973
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5359570%22
---

 

 THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN 

 MEMBER FOR SYDNEY    

 

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  STRATHFIELD SOUTH HIGH SCHOOL, SYDNEY  SATURDAY, 24 JUNE 2017    

 SUBJECTS:  Malcolm Turnbull’s unfair cuts to schools; Bali bombing charge;  Liberal Party delegate comments; Scott Morrison.   

 TANYA PLIBERSEK, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: It tells you  everything you need to know about Malcolm Turnbull's schools policy that the first  place he visited yesterday was Santa Sabina, a school about a kilometre away from  here. A school that charges $22,000 a year in fees. That school will actually get a  $19 million increase under Malcolm Turnbull's schools policy. This school behind us,  South Strathfield High, it gets a million dollar cut at the same time. So a school with  fabulous resources that charges $22,000 per year in fees, gets a $19 million  increase and a school like many public schools in New South Wales, that could  really do with the extra funding, well it will get a cut. That's what Malcolm Turnbull  means when he says 'needs based funding'. It's incredible. This is a schools policy  that cuts billions of dollars from schools. I will never be grateful for the fact that  instead of cutting $22 billion from our schools, Malcolm Turnbull has been forced to  put in a bit of extra money and now he is only cutting $17 billion from our schools.  This is not needs based funding. This is not sector blind funding, as the Prime  Minister continues to claim. It’s not sector blind funding when public school children  receive 20 per cent of the cost of their education and private school kids get 80 per  cent of the cost of their education funded by the Commonwealth Government. That's  not sector blind, that is treating public school kids and private school kids completely  differently. This is not needs based funding, it’s not needs based when a public  school like the one we are at today, gets a million dollar cut and a private school just  down the road that has fantastic resources, that charges $22,000 a year in fees, that  gets a $19 million increase. It's not needs based funding when public schools across  New South Wales will lose close to $850 million and private schools, like the one the  Prime Minister visited yesterday, like the King's School in Parramatta, will actually  receive multimillion dollar increases. Thats's the same story right across Australia. 

 The poorest kids in Australia, those attending Northern Territory public schools, they  get the worst funding deal in the country. The second worst funding deal in the  country goes to Tasmanian public school kids, while elite private schools in  Tasmania again get multimillion dollar increases. This new schools policy that was  rammed through the Senate and the House of Representatives in the last dying  hours of the Parliament this week, actually sees massive cuts to public schools, it  sees billions of dollars cut from low fee Catholic schools and it sees multimillion  dollar increases to private schools and at the same time it actually removes the  entire reform agenda that Labor had agreed with the states: our ambition to see  more young people completing year 12, our ambition to see Australia in the top 5  performers internationally once again, our ambition to close the gap between  indigenous and non-indigenous students, our ambition to improve teaching in  Australia, our ambition to give more autonomy to schools so school communities can  decide how to best invest their increased needs based funding. All of these  ambitions have been removed from the education Act that went through the  parliament this week. So it's less money, the money is unfairly spent and the reform  agenda is gone from education in Australia. I'm now going to ask Maurie Mulheron to  say a few words about school funding.   

 MAURIE MULHERON, PRESIDENT OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES TEACHERS  FEDERATION: The funding model that was pushed through Parliament at the end of  this week is a disgrace. What it means, for the first time in Australian history, we  have legislation where the Commonwealth owes 80 per cent of its funding to private  schools and only 20 per cent to public schools. What does that mean on the ground?  For a school like this which had used the Gonski funding up to now to have smaller  class sizes in year 7, intensive literacy and numeracy programs, HSC enrichment,  additional quality professional development for its staff, all those kinds of programs,  real programs are at risk. Yet a school down the road, Santa Sabina, with equestrian  activities and a swimming pool and tennis courts they get $19 million presumably to  keep funding those facilities but this school that was using the money for real  teaching and learning programs, those programs are at risk. The principal and the  staff at this school, like schools right across this country and across the state will be  saying 'what will we now have to cut because of the funding model that was put  through the Parliament on the early hours of Friday morning?'.   

 JOURNALIST: Just from listening to the Opposition there is some indication, you  sent me some of the more remote schools in the Northern Territory and Tasmania  [inaudible] is New South Wales itself going to miss out greatly [inaudible]   

 MULHERON: In terms of the global figure for New South Wales, let’s just look at this  electorate of Reid. This electorate of Reid, which has 25 public schools, the local  Liberal MP has voted and those 25 schools will now lose $11 million out of the  promised $14 million, he’s put his hand up for that. That's happening right across  New South Wales. The global figure would be in the next few years, public schools in  New South Wales would lose about $846 million dollars, in the next 4 years that  ramps up to $1.5 billion lost. Every single community across the State will see their  local public schools lose money. For rural and remote schools the situation is even  worse because the original model, the original Gonski funding model, put money into  rural and remote schools because that's where the greatest need was identified, so  those seats with National Party MPs have now put their hand up this week to vote for 

 cuts to their seats, we are going to see the greatest amount of funding removed from  those rural and remote communities right across New South Wales, indeed right  across the country.   

 JIHAD DIB, NSW SHADOW EDUCATION MINISTER: Well good morning  everybody. It says everything that we need to know about Malcolm Turnbull and his  idea of needs based funding that the day he wants to parade around his new  agreement he goes to a school down the road that charges $22,000 for fees, when  only one kilometre away a school will lose $1 million. Now the school that charges  $22,000 per student in fees, is going to gain $19 million over a 10 year period while  the school that does the heavy lifting in terms of the number of students that it has  from disadvantaged backgrounds, students with high literacy needs, numeracy  needs, takes in refugee students and works with its local community stands to lose  $1 million over 2 years time. Now that says everything that you need to know about  Malcolm Turnbull's idea of needs based funding. New South Wales public schools  will lose $846 million. Now that is a figure that was signed, an agreement between  the Federal Government and the State Government and you expect governments to  honour their agreement. Only a month ago I stood with the Minister for Education  and all we asked for was that the Federal Commonwealth Government honour the  agreement they made with the people of New South Wales to ensure that every  single school in New South Wales had the opportunity to provide its students and its  school communities with the best possible outcomes. And what does that translate to  in the classroom? It simply means things like we can ensure that students who need  support so they can meet their educational outcomes can receive them. Specialist  teachers can be brought in to assist students who need literacy support, numeracy  support. We want to talk about closing the gap, you need to fund that. And with this  new policy that is now in place, all of those reforms that had been agreed to have  now come off the table, so these reforms about the teaching quality, about the  resourcing standards, about making sure that we can close those gaps. All those  aspirational targets that we talk about well they are now off the table, so when  somebody tells me that the coalition government believes in needs based funding I  simply say this 'how can you stand out the front of a school that charges $22,000 in  year end fees, stands to gain $19 million and then there is a school down the road  that does the heavy lifting in terms of the students and the community it serves, who  stands to lose $1 million and tell me that's fair?' It's not fair and it’s not right.   

 JOURNALIST: With regards to, so the Catholic school model was not [inaudible]   

 PLIBERSEK: Well the National Catholic Education Commission has made it very  clear that they don’t believe the Education Act that passed through the Parliament  this week is acceptable. And they’ve made it clear that they will continue to  campaign against the unfair funding cuts to small low fee parish Catholic schools.  The worst affected sectors by this new Education Act are public schools and the low  fee Catholic schools.    

 JOURNALIST: [inaudible]                                                                                                                                          

 

 PLIBERSEK: We will continue to work with advocates for public school education,  teachers and parents who want to stand up for better funding for public schools and 

 we will continue to work with the advocates for the low fee Catholic sector, the  parents and teachers who want to stand up and fight for better funding for their  students. In fact when you look at public schools across Australia you see millions of  dollars of cuts in every state and territory, hundreds of millions of dollars of cuts over  the next two years alone but you also see very substantial cuts to the low fee  Catholic schools, many of them are actually facing closure, they are facing either fee  increases that would make an education in those schools completely unaffordable  for parents or they are facing closure. 

 JOURNALIST: Those at risk Catholic schools have the option to get one off  payments to help them sort of stabilise and there's $50 million I think that been set  aside for that, do think that will be worthwhile in helping them secure themselves for  the next few years? 

 PLIBERSEK: The $50 million that's been set aside for Catholic schools to cover the  change period is no where near adequate according to the National Catholic  Education Commission, for the size of the cuts that they are trying to deal with.  Some school communities that currently have fees of around $2,000 a year, maybe  $3,000 a year are being told that they would have to charge fees of $8,000 or $9,000  a year according to the Government's model for them to continue to break even.  Now that is just not within the financial possibilities of most families, particularly if  they've got 2 or 3 kids at school. So parents are right now making a decision that if  fees go up to that extent that they won't be able to continue to chose a Catholic  education for their children. But as I keep saying this is about public schools, about  the billions of dollars that will be lost from public schools and about the low fee  Catholic schools and the billions lost from low fee Catholic schools and it tells you all  you need to know about the Prime Minister that on the one hand he is talking about  needs based funding, on the other hand you're seeing elite private schools that will  get multimillion dollar increases over the next decade. The Prime Minister visited a  school yesterday that will receive $19 million extra over the decade that is already  incredibly well resourced so this is not needs based funding.    

 JOURNALIST: Do you think Jacqui Lambie will regret the decision given Tasmania  [inaudible] 

 PLIBERSEK: Tasmania is one of the states that is hardest hit by these changes.  You'll see schools across Tasmania, public schools losing millions of dollars and we  believe over $80 million lost from Tasmanian schools over the next 2 years. The  majority of that, over $60 million from public schools in Tasmania. But remember  Tasmania has a lot of small towns and in those small towns you also see some small  Catholic schools, the Tasmanian Catholic sector is talking about having to close  schools in those small towns because they can't afford to keep them open anymore.    

 JOURNALIST: Just on a couple of other things. Liberal party delegate Sophie Scott,  says the Liberals shouldn't get rid of how-to-vote cards because people of low IQ  don't always vote Labor. What do you think of those remarks? 

 PLIBERSEK: Well I just think those remarks speak for themselves don't they? I'm  not going to dignify them with a comment.    

 JOURNALIST: And US media is reporting that the alleged Bali bomber Hambali  who is still in Guantanamo Bay has been charged by US authorities [inaudible]. Have  you received any information or are aware...   

 PLIBERSEK: No, I mean look I heard the reports on the radio this morning that  Hambali has been charged and will face a military court about his involvement in the  Bali bombings, well over 200 people died, 88 Australians died in those  Bali bombings. I hope he faces the full force of justice. That was a shocking attack  on civilians just out having a good time and I'm very pleased to see that he will be  facing court.    

 JOURNALIST: Just regarding Scott Morrison's comments about politicians needing  to be more authentic, what do you think about that coming from him?   

 PLIBERSEK: Well I think a couple of things. I mean, I guess if you're Scott Morrison  you shouldn't assume that people getting to know you more is necessarily a good  thing. You've got a Treasurer who is right now behind tax increases for ordinary  working people, a half percent tax increase for ordinary working people and massive  tax cuts for millionaires, so if you're on a million bucks a year from 1st July you'll get  a $16,400 a year tax cut, if you're a bank executive you'll get a $180,000 a year tax  cut due to Scott Morrison. If you're an ordinary working person, if you're a teacher at  this school you'll get a tax increase because of Scott Morrison. From Sunday 2nd  July people working that Sunday are going to see their penalty rates cut because of  this government. We have got the lowest wages growth on record, we've got the  highest underemployment on record, We've got unemployment at close to global  financial crisis levels. That is the authentic Scott Morrison. The authentic Scott  Morrison is a man who is prepared to put up taxes for ordinary working Australians,  cut taxes for millionaires, give big business a $65 billion tax cut, see cuts to wages,  cuts to penalty rates, make life harder for ordinary working people. That is the  authentic Scott Morrison. I think the bad news for Scott Morrison is people have  worked that out. Thanks everyone.                                                                                                                                          

 

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350   

