---
title: "New approaches to help more young people into work"
date: "2017-03-07"
creators:
  - "Cash, Michaelia"
source: "MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/242803689
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5139500%22
---

 

 Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT  MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE 

 SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA 

 

 MEDIA RELEASE 

 

 7 March 2017 

 

 NEW APPROACHES TO HELP MORE   YOUNG PEOPLE INTO WORK   

 The Turnbull Government has today announced the latest round of successful organisations  that will provide assistance to young people to overcome barriers to unemployment. 

 The Empowering YOUth Initiative seeks to empower young people who are disengaged from  the workforce or school and who face complex issues that affect their future. 

 Minister for Employment, Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash, was today hosted by Anglicare  WA to announce the additional 21 organisations that will be offered the opportunity to  deliver new approaches to assist young people into work.  

 “Anglicare WA’s success in the latest application round means they are able to design, test  and implement new intervention methods to meet the needs of homeless young people and  place them into employment,” Minister Cash said. 

 “The Turnbull Government is determined to break the cycle of unemployment and welfare  dependency and to do so it is critical to focus on young Australians.” 

 “We are committed to implementing new and innovative approaches to help young people  into jobs and that is exactly what the Empowering YOUth Initiative delivers,” Minister Cash  said. 

 “Tackling youth unemployment will require Government contemplate new ideas and to think  outside the box. By exploring, developing and refining new concepts we will boost  employment outcomes for young Australians.” 

 Applicants in the second round of Empowering YOUth Initiatives were invited to apply for  grant funding of up to $5 million to deliver initiatives over two years to young people aged  15 to 24 get into work.  

 CM15-000071  

 The Department of Employment will partner with the successful organisations to support the  evaluation of each initiative, which will inform new policies and programs targeted at young  people. 

 “The Turnbull Government’s allocation of $50 million to the Empowering YOUth Initiatives  demonstrates our commitment to assisting young people into the workplace,” Minister Cash  said. 

 “Early intervention can mean the difference between a young person taking their first steps  into a productive and happy working life or entering a life of welfare dependency.”  

 Empowering YOUth Initiatives is part of the Government’s Youth Employment Strategy  announced in the Growing Jobs and Small Business Package in the 2015-16 Budget. 

 For more information on Empowering YOUth Initiatives and other support available for  young people under the Government’s Youth Employment Strategy visit:  www.employment.gov.au/youth 

 Please find attached the list of successful organisations under round two of Empowering  YOUth Initiatives. 

 Media contacts:  Office of Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash: (02) 6277 7320  David De Garis 0427 019 692  Department Media: media@employment.gov.au 

 

 Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT  MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MINISTER ASSISTING THE PRIME MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE 

 SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA 

 

 

 Successful Round 2 Empowering YOUth Initiative Organisations 

 The following organisations will be offered an opportunity to deliver Empowering YOUth Initiatives under the second round of funding:   

 Organisation Description Participants Location 

 Headspace  Through the Digital Industry Mentor Service 

 participants will be able to link online with  experienced industry mentors in order to develop  their confidence, networking and soft skills.  Mentors will increase employment opportunities for  participants through existing networks and setting  realistic goals that align with participants’ skills and  work-readiness. 

 Young people aged 17-24 who are  from disadvantaged backgrounds  and suffer from mental health  issues.  

 National 

 

 Black Swan Health Ltd Through an interactive, user-centred app (YAppE -  Youth App Employment), participants living with  mental illness will be provided with post-placement  support to help sustain their employment. Data will  be tracked and monitored daily by a team of mental  health professionals ready to provide hands-on  support and immediate assistance where required.  

 Young people aged 15-24 with  mental illness who require  assistance to sustain employment. 

 National 

 Vision Australia Through the Building Stronger Futures initiative,  young people who are blind or have low vision will  receive pre-employment support in a simulated  work environment to develop soft skills,  communication skills, interview techniques and  explore career options. This will combine with  mental health support to help young people gain  permanent employment. 

 Young people aged 15-24 who are  blind or have low vision.  ACT, NSW, QLD and VIC  Metro and regional areas. 

 

 Karingal Inc Through the Youth Community model, participants 

 will build strong peer-support networks and be  supported in developing their social skills,  leadership skills, employability, confidence and  motivation to seek employment. This program  includes access to online platforms incorporating  gamification and rewards to motivate participants to  reach goals and complete the program while also  receiving mentoring support. 

 Young people aged 15-24 who are  long-term unemployed or at risk  of becoming long-term  unemployed. 

 VIC, SA and QLD  Metro and regional areas.    

 

 Apprentices and Trainees  Employment Ltd.  Through participating in the Road2Wheels  mentoring-based driver education program, 

 participants will receive financial planning and  employability skills training, including interview  techniques, understanding employer expectations  and job search techniques. Participants will be  supported to get their driver’s licence, secure a job  and achieve their goal of purchasing a vehicle.  

 Young people aged 16-18 who are  at risk of becoming long-term  unemployed. 

 NSW & VIC  Albury, Wodonga and Wagga  Wagga    

 Rotary Club of Alexandra Rotary’s Joined-Up Jobs in Small Towns initiative  will help young people build employment  opportunities through joining up part time and  casual jobs to provide a liveable wage. Working  with local employers and the community, young  people will be assisted to identify and negotiate job  opportunities. Participants will be provided with  support to address low self-esteem, lack of  confidence and poor community connection, and be  offered tailored pre-employment training that meets  their needs.  

 Young people aged 15-24 who are  long-term unemployed or at risk  of becoming long-term  unemployed. 

 VIC  Murrindindi Shire including:  Alexandra, Kinglake,  Marysville, Yea and Eildon    

 IEmpower Youth Inc Participants in the iEmpower Youth Cooperative  initiative will contribute to the establishment and  management of a graffiti removal and cleaning  cooperative, developing their employability skills  and understanding of business management  principles. They will also gain the experience  necessary to branch out into other industries,  including event preparation, security and property  maintenance. 

 Young people aged 15-24,  including migrants, refugees, ex-offenders and homeless young  people. 

 VIC   Melbourne City 

 

 Colony 47  Through the Backswing initiative, a range of 

 simulated workplace projects will be established  where participants will pitch their ideas to a panel  of local community representatives, including local  employers. Participants will gain work skills  through the development and delivery of various  community-derived advocacy campaigns on issues  relevant to their local community, such as  preventing family violence, improving road safety  and tackling obesity. Each project will be overseen  by local employers and community representatives. 

 Young people aged 15-24, young  people unemployed for 12 months  or more, or those at risk of  becoming long-term unemployed. 

 TAS   Metro and regional areas.   

 Workskills Inc The Youth Entrepreneurial Services (YES) social  enterprise will provide supported work experience  for participants prior to moving onto a work  experience placement with a participating business  host. Participants will be supported by a Youth  Coach and Community Mentor to gain key  employment skills through creating and selling their  own products online. They will also run pop-up  stores and markets using uniquely designed retail  modules. 

 

 Young people aged 15-24 who are  from disadvantaged backgrounds.   TAS   Southern Tas  

 

 The Scouts Association NT  Branch   Through the Motoscouts initiative, participants will  gain valuable employability skills and training by 

 being part of a team building a Motorkhana-style  car. Participants will have the opportunity to gain a  Certificate I in Automotive, undertake driver  training, obtain a White Card, First Aid training,  financial training, cross-cultural training and work  experience. They will receive counselling and  mentoring support during and after the completion  of the program to ensure their success.  

 Young people aged 15-24,  including individuals with  previous contact with the criminal  justice system, early school  leavers and Indigenous youth.  

 NT   Metro and regional areas.   

 Anglicare Using a Human Centred Design approach, the 

 Designing for an Independent Future initiative will  design, test and implement new intervention  methods to meet the needs of homeless young  people and place them into employment.  

 Young people aged 16-24 who are  homeless or in temporary housing  arrangements. 

 WA   Perth  

 QLD Youth Services The Recycle Your Dreams initiative establishes a  social enterprise that recycles goods for re-sale.  Participants will engage in daily operations to  develop their entrepreneurial skills, including  business planning, product design, product making  and product distribution. Participants will also  receive a Cert II Skills for Work and Vocational  Pathways as part of completing the program. 

 Young people aged 15-24 who are  long-term unemployed or at risk  of becoming long-term  unemployed. 

 QLD   Townsville 

 

 The Trustee for Pathways to  Resilience  The Empowering Youth to Thrive initiative will use  a neuroscience approach to empower young people 

 in learning and happiness, assist with transitioning  into employment, increase confidence and ensure  they build stronger relationships in the workplace.  The initiative will work collaboratively with  families and caregivers, to ensure participants  receive a range of case management support.  

 Young people aged 15-24 who are  long-term unemployed or at risk  of becoming long-term  unemployed, prioritising  Indigenous young people.  

 QLD   Logan City Local Government  Area and Inala, Brisbane    

 Impact Community Services Through an anonymous telephone hotline service,  Employment firstAid (E+), participants and  employers will have access to advice and support  designed to enhance confidence and resilience in  the workplace. The service will promote a range of  strategies that employers and employees can adopt  to improve retention of young people in  employment.  

 Young people aged 15-24 who are  long-term unemployed, or at risk  of becoming long-term  unemployed.  

 Young people who are working. 

 QLD   Fraser Coast and Wide Bay  Regions  

 Settlement Services  International 

 Through the Youth Pathways and Placement  Project, participants will acquire employability  skills and work experience through short-term  employment in a range of social enterprises. They  will also be provided with targeted on-the-job  training to build their confidence and engagement  in the workplace, and be assisted with addressing  personal barriers with a focus on supporting  families and communities. A placement officer will  assist with transitioning into work and post-placement support.  

 Young people aged 15-24 who are  from disadvantaged backgrounds,  including refugees or new  arrivals, young people at risk of  homelessness, early school  leavers and other at-risk groups. 

 NSW   Inner Southwest Sydney,  Blacktown area and Greater  Liverpool-Fairfield    

 

 Joblink Plus Ltd Through The Trelawney initiative, a farm-based  social enterprise, participants will gain access to  personal development, Aboriginal cultural training,  work-readiness training and a Certificate III in  Rural Operations. Participants will develop  employability skills through participating in a range  of farm-based activities, while receiving case  management support to address personal barriers.    

 Indigenous and non-Indigenous  early school leavers aged 15-24.  NSW   Tamworth region  

 ECA Training Pty Ltd Through the Indigenous Apprenticeship Readiness  Program, participants will gain the skills,  experience and self-esteem necessary to  successfully begin an electrical apprenticeship.  They will also be provided with mentoring support  and personal development training through the  Mulga Gidgee Indigenous community organisation.  

 Indigenous young people aged 18-24.   NSW  Inner West Sydney, Western 

 Sydney and NSW Central Coast  (Wyong)  

 Baptist Care (SA) Inc Through the Tumbelin Case Management Program  initiative, participants will take part in an adventure  therapy program providing case management  support and career planning. A range of group  activities will focus on addressing personal barriers,  increasing participants’ confidence and developing  their job and teamwork skills. This will assist in  building their motivation to look for work and  attend job interviews, and help them remain  engaged in the workplace and seek feedback on  their performance. 

 Young people aged 15-24 who are  long-term unemployed or at risk  of becoming long-term  unemployed, including young  people with problematic alcohol  and drug use, mental health issues  and Indigenous youth.  

 SA   Port Lincoln and lower Eyre,  Southern and Northern Adelaide  

 

 MAS National  The Cycle for Change initiative will use BMX 

 riding workshops to engage and motivate young  people at risk of disengaging from school. Through  mentoring support and a range of vocational and  non-vocational workshops, participants will explore  behaviours and attitudes which have impacted their  learning or transition to employment. They will be  encouraged to complete Year 12 and explore better  pathways to sustainable employment. 

 Young people aged 15-24 who are  currently disengaged, or have the  potential to become disengaged,  from mainstream schooling and  are at risk of long-term  unemployment. 

 SA   City of Playford, City of  Salisbury, City of Port Adelaide  and Enfield regions  

 Workskil Australia The Get Moving initiative will see participants  living in regional and urban locations with slow  labour markets offered an integrated package of  assistance to relocate to sustainable employment.  Participants will receive support with travel,  resettlement, housing, peer support, well-being,  family dynamics and mentoring. 

 Young people aged 18-24 who are  unemployed and not in education  or training. 

 SA and VIC   North West Country SA,  Adelaide North SA, Hunter  Valley NSW and North West  Melbourne   

 Employment Options Inc Through the interactive Pathfinder game,  participants with learning difficulties or low  education outcomes will take part in virtual and  real-world activities to increase their motivation and  develop employability skills that will build their  confidence and ability to enter the workforce.  Pathfinder will incorporate gamification and  rewards principles to motivate participants to reach  goals and complete the program.  

 Young people aged 15-24 who  face multiple challenges,  including learning difficulties,  low literacy and numeracy,  mental illness and family issues. 

 SA   North-eastern suburbs of  Adelaide, including Klemzig,  Marden, Payneham, Maylands  and Norwood 

 

