---
title: "Address to the Australian Council for International Development National Conference, Melbourne"
date: "2017-11-01"
creators:
  - "Fierravanti-Wells, Concetta"
source: "MINISTER FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND THE PACIFIC"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/251335059
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5608098%22
---

 1 

 

 

 SENATOR THE HON CONCETTA FIERRAVANTI - WELLS  MINISTER FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND THE PACIFIC   

 Address to the Australian Council for International Development  National Conference, Melbourne  Wednesday, 1 November 2017   

 E&OE… 

 

 Thank you very much, Sam for your warm welcome and kind 

 introduction.  

 

 Y



 es of course, as with a surname like mine, yes I do have my 

 piece of paper that tells me that I have renounced my Italian 

 citizenship and I’m happy to show it in both Italian and in English 

 for anybody that may be interested! 

 

 Look, can I thank you first of all, Sam, on behalf of the Australian 

 Government for the time that you were President of ACFID. You 

 brought 



 a very balanced and pragmatic approach to your 

 leadership, and can I thank you very, very much for all your work. 

 

 As your term does come to an end you have much to be proud of, 

 and in particular the strengthening of the public-private 

 partnerships. 

 2 

 

 Can I also acknowledge Senator Claire Moore, the Shadow 

 Minister for International Development and the Pacific; can I 

 welcome Susan Pascoe, the incoming ACFID President; can I also 

 acknowledge Marc Purcell, your CEO; and also add my 

 acknowledgement of country. 

 

 On behalf of the Australian Government I am very, very pleased 

 to welcome you, Susan, to your new role.  Congratulations on 

 your election this morning. 

 

 There is a lot to do and we look forward to working with you 

 during your presidency. 

 

 Today, I’d like to take the opportunity to review progress over the 

 past 12 



 months and to look ahead to the next 12 months.  

 

 When I was last here I asked for your help and your support in 3 

 ke



 y areas, all of which do impact on the effectiveness of our aid 

 program. 

 

 First, I asked the sector to assist with the critical need to explain 

 what we are doing, why we are doing these activities, and most 

 importantly, the benefit to Australia. 

 3 

 

 Secondly, I asked you to engage and partner with diaspora in 

 Australia to support the delivery of our aid program. 

 

 And finally, I asked you to consider partnering with the private 

 sector to strengthen funding and aid delivery mechanisms.  

 

 So, 12 months on, what has been achieved towards these goals? 

 Now, The Lowy Institute’s 2017 poll found that, as with previous 

 years, Australians as a whole were largely unconcerned by 

 reductions in our aid program. 

 

 Although most people overestimated the aid budget, almost three 

 out of four feel that the Government still spends either too much, 

 or about the right amount on aid. 

 

 Research conducted by the Australian National University 

 Development Policy Centre also produced similar results.  

 

 Their comparison of the general Australian public’s perception of 

 the aid budget to the Australian aid community was particularly 

 interesting, with more than 80% of the aid community seeking 

 more spending on aid, compared to only 10% of the broad 

 Australian public. 

 4 

 

 This research suggests there is a difference in perceptions between 

 Australian tax payers and the aid sector.  

 

 So therefore, we have a responsibility to demonstrate to all 

 Australians what the benefit is of our Australian aid program. 

 

 In so doing, we need to respond to those who ask why we spend 

 taxpayers’ money overseas rather than at home or not at all, and 

 why we spend money on our neighbours when their economies in 

 some areas are growing and their prosperity is rising.  

 

 Over the last 12 months, I have used every opportunity to explain 

 how Australian aid benefits Australians, not just those in receipt of 

 it. 

 

 I have stressed that Australia will benefit if citizens in our region 

 are healthy, well educated, and making an economic contribution 

 in their own country. 

 

 I have highlighted that Australia helps to build long-term stability 

 and prosperity in our region, thereby reducing the potential cost of 

 future dependence on aid, and opening up economic and trade 

 opportunities. 

 5 

 

 On overseas visits, I have highlighted that the money we are 

 investing not only helps the recipients, but it also helps 

 Australians. 

 

 I am the first to admit that my efforts alone are by no means, and 

 certainly, are not enough. We need many, many minds and many 

 voices on the job.  

 

 We need to build that very necessary broad consensus in favour of 

 an Australian aid program that grows stronger from year to year, 

 as Australians increasingly recognise the benefits it brings to 

 them.  

 

 We have a great story to tell. 

 

 The Turnbull Government increased our aid in the last Budget by 

 a significant $84 million.  

 

 This included increasing our humanitarian and emergency budget 

 by $60 million to $400 million to help preserve the gains 

 communities make in the good times and recover more quickly 

 from hard times. 

 

 6 

 Now, often you have commentary that we are compared to other 

 countries in the world. 

 

 Now we know that the OECD, its Development Assistance 

 Committee, redefined aid to include security and in-country 

 refugee costs. 

 

 Australia has separate, we don’t include that, we have a separate 

 settlement services budget and so therefore I think often when 

 there is a comparison made it’s really comparing apples and 

 oranges. 

 

 With 90% of our aid budget spent in the Indo-Pacific, we know 

 full well that stability in our region is our collective prosperity. 

 

 It is of direct benefit to Australians. 

 

 We also increased funding to NGO and volunteer programs by $5 

 million, up to $183.4 million and we opened additional funding 

 opportunities to NGOs.  

 

 I 



 was surprised that these significant increases in the Australian 

 aid effort were to a large degree missed at Budget time. 

 

 7 

 But in any case, the Australian Government is lifting our efforts in 

 our region.  

 

 In September, Prime Minister Turnbull announced Australia’s 

 Pacific Step-Up at the Pacific Island Forum Meeting in Samoa. 

 

 This includes strengthening economic growth and resilience, 

 enhancing security co-operation, and deepening people-to-people 

 links across the region. 

 

 Australia is committed to continued cooperation with the Pacific 

 Island countries to achieve our shared goal of a stronger, safer and 

 more prosperous region. 

 

 Security and stability in the region means stability and security for 

 Australia. 

 

 So, I’ve been asked to sort of share with you some of my 

 observations on this particular point. 

 

 So today when we talk about security in our region, I tend to refer 

 to it as small ‘s’ security.  

 

 8 

 It’s about today, transnational crime, it’s about illegal unreported 

 and unregulated fishing, it’s about drug trafficking.  

 

 In the last three months we have had two of the largest drug hauls 

 destined for Australia- over two tonnes of drugs. 

 

 Thanks to the efforts of our cooperation with our Pacific 

 neighbours, we have been able to intercept those drugs. 

 

 It’s about people, potential people trafficking. 

 

 These are the security issues that we are now facing in our region. 

 

 But, dealing with these security issues will only be dealt with 

 effectively because of the strong people-to-people links that we do 

 have. 

 

 It’s about raising the capacity of our neighbouring countries, 

 particularly in the Pacific region- where a third of our aid is spent- 

 raising their capacity to meet these challenges. We have old 

 challenges, but we have these new challenges.  

 

 

 9 

 One of the important things in the fabric and the framework of the 

 work that we do, especially in the Pacific, is the work of our 

 volunteers and the work of your organisations that are involved in 

 the Pacific. 

 

 If I can say one thing about my travels, and now I’ve been… I’ve 

 done 24 trips to the Pacific since I’ve been Minister, but really I 

 only started travelling in August last year and one of the things 

 that’s very, very clear to me- and I really wanted to share this with 

 you- is the genuineness of the work that we do and the work that 

 you do. 

 

 It’s about helping the people of our region. We go with a 

 transparent, open approach that is very, very welcome. 

 

 In the many places that I have been I am always stopped and 

 thanked for the contribution that Australia and Australian NGOs 

 and Australian Volunteers make to our region. 

 

 I particularly wanted to pass that onto you today.  

 

 So, when we talk about our engagement and our engagement in 

 the Pacific, the Australian Government is very committed to 

 10 

 stepping-up and increasing opportunities, not just in terms of what 

 we may do in country, but also bringing the Pacific to us. 

 

 One of the centrepieces of our step-up engagement is 

 opportunities for Pacific Island workers to work in Australia. 

 

 We look to NGOs to work with our Pacific diasporas in Australia 

 to maximise the support that the workers receive here.  

 

 I encourage those of you who work with the Australian 

 Government in the Pacific to share your version of Australia’s 

 Pacific story with as many people as possible. 

 

 Staying in the Pacific, I represented Australia at the conclusion of 

 the Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands 

 (RAMSI), where we invested $2.8 billion over 14 years. 

 

 I was very much touched by the comments as the leaders gathered 

 in Honiara at the end of RAMSI and we had a meeting, and to 

 hear Prime Minister Sogavare thank us and say ‘yes, Australia is 

 the biggest house on the block, but you are very much a part of the 

 Pacific family.’ 

 

 11 

 And so therefore, our collective efforts that we made as part of 

 RAMSI have now become an international model for restoring 

 stability and security to a troubled region. 

 

 As the Defence White Paper makes very, very clear, the stability, 

 security



  and prosperity of our region is second only to the defence 

 of Australia. 

 

 So, moving forward, yes RAMSI has concluded, but that doesn’t 

 mean that we just move on. 

 

 And so as part of the work that we’ve done in the Solomon 

 Islands, we will provide a $141 million post-RAMSI Security and 

 Stability Development Assistance Package, which basically 

 composes three elements. 

 

 And I know that some of you are involved in the work that we’re 

 doing there. 

 

 There’s a Justice Program, there’s a Governance Program and 

 there’s a Police Development Program. 

 

 12 

 I am pleased to say that in addition to RAMSI creating peace and 

 stability, it has also created the vital space for ACFID members to 

 deliver important services in the Solomon Islands.  

 

 Of course, Australia’s interests in our region extend beyond the 

 Pacific.   

 

 In March this year I visited Myanmar where I met with Aung San 

 Suu Kyi and gained some personal insight into the complex 

 situation there.   

 

 We are deeply concerned at the ongoing violence in the Rakhine 

 State and the devastating impact that this has had on over 600,000 

 Rohingya who have crossed the border into Bangladesh.  

 

 This has been a major focus of the Government.  Indeed, we are 

 one of the leading contributors to the international response to this 

 crisis.    

 

 On the 23 October, Foreign Minister Bishop announced additional 

 Australian assistance of $10 million to help provide food, clean 

 water, sanitation and shelter for displaced people.  

 

 13 

 This funding will also help to treat children for malnutrition, 

 create safe and secure areas for women, and provide maternal 

 health services.  

 

 This, of course, is additional assistance to what we announced of 

 $20 million in September.  

 

 Our support is helping to meet the needs of the displaced 

 Rohingya - especially the women. 

 

 By protecting vulnerable individuals and alleviating the need for 

 potentially dangerous onward movement, we are contributing to 

 regional stability and security.  

 

 But there is globally, one security threat to Australians that has no 

 regard for borders - and that is disease.  

 

 W



 e recognise that substantial funding, expertise and vision is 

 required to manage the major health threats that we now face in 

 our region. 

 

 This is why we trebled our $100 million election commitment to 

 health security. 

 

 14 

 The new $300 million Health Security Initiative for the Indo-Pacific Region over 5 years represents the largest health and 

 medical research commitment ever made under Australia’s 

 development assistance program. 

 

 It will drive research on drug-resistant TB- which we know is 

 endemic particularly in certain parts of Papua New Guinea- and 

 malaria; it will build partnerships between governments, 

 universities, NGOs and business; and it will create a new Health 

 Security Corps to build capacity in the health sector across the 

 region. 

 

 The benefit of Australian’s investment is crystal clear - it’s about 

 safety and it’s about health. 

 

 This initiative will be implemented by the Indo-Pacific Centre for 

 Health Security and I ask those of you who partner with us on this 

 investment to make this case to the Australian taxpayers. 

 

 I also encourage you all to follow the Centre’s progress and 

 consider how you can work with it, to improve people’s health in 

 the communities that you know best. 

 

 15 

 Our vision for Australian Aid to be recognised as a leader in 

 innovation, we want to deliver innovation, to deliver new and 

 cost-effective solutions to pressing development challenges to 

 improve the lives of people in the Indo-Pacific region. 

 

 This is being realised by the Government’s flagship 

 InnovationXchange. 

 

 We are finding new ways to improve lives through10 global 

 challenges, sourcing over 1,000 ideas, and supporting over 65 

 innovations.  

 

 The Australian Government was pleased to support ACFID’s 

 efforts to encourage innovation through the development of the 

 Innovation Guide that is being launched here at this conference.    

 

 We were also pleased to see the implementation of your new Code 

 of Conduct from July this year that will continue to build the 

 capacity, accountability, and transparency of NGOs working 

 overseas. 

 

 Susan, I am confident that your experience in regulation will be an 

 asset to ACFID in supporting members to understand and comply 

 with this new Code.  

 16 

 

 ACFID’s contributions to a range of policy dialogues with DFAT 

 are always welcomed. 

 

 We recognise ACFID’s contribution to the Sustainable 

 Development Goals and in particular on gender, and for example; 

 on International Women’s Day this year, Foreign Minister Bishop 

 announced the Australian NGO Gender Action Platform. 

 

 This is generating new partnerships for the aid program between, 

 for example, customary leaders in the Pacific and church leaders 

 to counter gender-based violence. 

 

 Regrettably, this is something that is endemic in our region and is 

 very much, I have to say, I believe a barrier to empowerment of 

 women in the region. 

 

 It is really heartbreaking- as I’ve gone across and I make it a point 

 when I go to the Pacific to speak to women and women’s groups- 

 to hear this continuous litany of issues about domestic violence. 

 

 And so therefore, empowerment and empowerment of women is 

 really going to be a partnership that we are going to have to do 

 17 

 with customary leaders and church leaders to combat these very 

 high levels of gender-based violence.   

 

 As I have said partnerships are very important, particularly with 

 the private sector and diasporas.  From last year, I can see some 

 very good movement in the right direction.  

 

 Under the Business Partnership Platform, the Department partners 

 with business to help deliver our aid program.  

 

 The 9 partnerships that are now underway have brought in over $8 

 million in additional investment in support of development 

 outcomes.   

 

 ACFID has also been proactive in co-hosting meetings with major 

 Australian companies that are interested in how they might 

 support climate financing and the SDGs.  

 

 These examples are encouraging and I hope to see more private 

 sector engagement in 2018. 

 

 It makes clear sense for Government and the sector to align our 

 efforts with diaspora, particularly given that in 2016 Australian 

 diaspora sent approximately $2.5 billion to the Pacific alone. 

 18 

 

 And also, I had occasion this year to attend the African Union 

 Meeting in Addis Ababa and of course let’s not forget that our 

 African diaspora of around 350,000 people here in Australia remit 

 about $1 billion to Africa as well. 

 

 So, Australians with family and business connections in the 

 countries to which we give development assistance have expertise 

 and contacts on which we should draw on to make our aid 

 program as good as it can be.  

 

 Diasporas can help advocate an Australian aid program that both 

 benefits their country of origin and builds stronger links with 

 Australia. 

 

 I had the opportunity this year to visit Sri Lanka and I think that as 

 we do look at what Sri Lanka has gone through over recent years, 

 we do see the importance of the role that diaspora will play, 

 including the Sri Lankan diaspora here in Australia, in terms of the 

 future of Sri Lanka.  

 

 So, I would encourage this dialogue with diasporas because they 

 do provide absolutely vitally important insights, particularly the 

 younger and the next generation of those diasporas who do see 

 19 

 engagement with countries and their parent’s former country as 

 vitally important to their future in trade and other economic links. 

 

 I would also welcome more initiatives from ACFID and members, 

 bringing more diasporas into closer contact with our Australian 

 Aid program. 

 

 I am encouraged to see that ACFID members, particularly NGOs 

 engaged in the Australian NGO Cooperation Program, are now 

 more active in their social media, acknowledging Government 

 support, and sharing stories of what is being achieved with the 

 help of Australian aid. 

 

 ACFID members have achieved impressive results through our 

 Australia NGO Cooperation Program last financial year reaching 

 almost 13 million people, including 4 million with essential 

 medicines, and over 170,000 poor women with access to financial 

 services, just to use some examples. 

 

 Those involved in delivering the aid program can be among our 

 most effective communicators about the program’s successes, you 

 have on the ground examples and anecdotes that illustrate clearly 

 the benefits, not just to the people receiving our Australian 

 assistance, but to Australia and where Australia benefits.   

 20 

 

 One way we can improve the Australian public’s engagement with 

 the aid program is through a more joined up approach to 

 communicating about our collective efforts, including in response 

 to humanitarian crises. 

 

 We know from international experience that, by providing a ‘one 

 stop shop’ for public engagement and contributions, joint funding 

 appeals for humanitarian crises can; increase revenue generation, 

 diversify the donor base, provide opportunities for enhanced 

 private sector partnerships; and enhance public understanding and 

 perception of what humanitarian agencies do. 

 

 I welcome the ongoing discussions in the sector about developing 

 a joint appeal mechanism for humanitarian crises.   

 

 Done effectively, this has the potential to create a powerful 

 platform for us to communicate with the public on how their 

 contributions - as both taxpayers and private donors - are making 

 a diff



 erence in our region. 

 

 So, overall, we have had a busy 12 months with significant 

 progress on many fronts.   

 

 21 

 No doubt 2018 will again bring challenges that we can meet with 

 our continued partnership. 

 

 It will be a big year for our 2030 Agenda, with Australia 

 presenting our first Voluntary National Review in New York in 

 July.   

 

 We will report on all our efforts to achieve the Goals, both 

 domestically and internationally. 

 

 In recent months, DFAT has increased its website and social 

 media focus on the SDGs, linking to the websites and social media 

 accounts of several partners in this room, and highlighting 

 initiatives such as the Sustainable Development Solutions 

 Network’s Universities Guide to the SDGs.  

 

 And can I say, following our meeting this morning, Sam, Susan 

 and Marc agreed with us and we’ve agreed to a Government 

 business forum with ACFID and the Government to promote 

 SDGs, because after all- and we’ll look at having this forum 

 sometime next year- because after all SDGs do make good 

 business sense. 

 

 22 

 That’s really the message that we want to communicate, so we 

 look forward to working with ACFID in terms of this engagement, 

 particularly with business.   

 

 2018 will also be the year when we all digest and respond to the 

 guidance the Australian Government will provide, through the 

 Foreign Policy White Paper, for our international engagement 

 over the next 10 years. 

 

 Can I thank ACFID and its members for their valuable 

 contributions through the White Paper process: it has been greatly 

 appreciated. 

 

 The White Paper - the first since 2003 - will communicate our 

 framework for seizing opportunities and mitigating risks in an 

 international environment experiencing profound changes. 

 

 Development assistance will remain an important element of our 

 international engagement. 

 

 I look forward to a year of marked progress, including in the 3 

 are



 as I have returned to again today; partnerships with business, 

 partnerships with diaspora communities, and a much greater effort 

 to advocate the benefits of Australian aid to all Australians. 

 23 

 

 If we can win stronger and broader Australian support for the 

 Australian aid program, then the work we do together will be on a 

 surer footing. 

 

 May the benefits flow far and wide across our continent and 

 across our region. 

 

 Can I thank you for your kind attention and wish you all the very, 

 very best in your efforts and again thank you very, very much for 

 all the work that you do and your commitment to helping many, 

 many people across the world who are in need. 

 

 Thank you. 

 

 [ENDS] 

