---
title: "Transfer of refugees from Manus Island to Nauru"
date: "2017-10-11"
creators:
  - "Neumann, Shayne"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/251165111
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5565549%22
---

 

 SHAYNE NEUMANN MP 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR    

 TRANSFER OF REFUGEES FROM MANUS ISLAND TO NAURU    

 Transferring refugees from Manus Island to Nauru is a glaring admission of failure by an  Immigration Minister who is incapable of appropriately managing offshore processing  centres or securing other third country resettlement arrangements.    

 Manus Island and Nauru were set up as regional transit facilities but have become  places of indefinite detention because of the Abbott-Turnbull Government’s failure to  secure other third country resettlement options.    

 Transferring up to 700 refugees from one centre to another is not a long term solution;  these people urgently need viable third country resettlement options.     

 Peter Dutton should have made securing third country resettlement options a priority  from his first day on the job as Immigration Minister.     

 Peter Dutton has serious questions to answer about his plans to transfer refugees from  Manus Island to Nauru.    

 What services will be available for those refugees who are left behind on Manus Island?    

 Why did Peter Dutton wait until there was only 20 days until the closure of the Manus  Island centre to make his move at the last minute?    

 Will Peter Dutton guarantee conditions won’t deteriorate for the women, children and  families already living in Nauru Regional Processing Centre when up to 700 refugees  move into the centre?    

 Peter Dutton still hasn’t explained how security, health and welfare services in Nauru  will be delivered when the current contractors pull out on 31 October.    

 There has been no open tender process to ensure ongoing services in Nauru are  secured, value for money in contracting is achieved or that basic service delivery  standards will be met. 

 

 Now Peter Dutton is talking about shuffling close to an additional 700 refugees into a  centre where there is no guarantee the basics of security, food and health services will  be available from next month onwards.    

 Labor recently wrote to Peter Dutton to express our concerns about the availability of  medical services and transfers for asylum seekers and refugees and sought assurance  that medical transfers will be available when required and recommended by medical  experts.    

 Three weeks later, the Chief Medical Officer and Surgeon General responsible for  overseeing healthcare and medical treatment of asylum seekers and refugees resigned  from the Department of Immigration and Border Protection.    

 It’s time Peter Dutton accepts responsibility for the mess he has made in Manus and  Nauru and immediately commences negotiation of other third country resettlement  options for eligible refugees.    

 WEDNESDAY, 11 OCTOBER 2017    

 MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110    

