---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Parliament House, Canberra: 1 June 2017: Malaysian Airlines flight MH128; extension to the instant asset write-off programme; small business tax cuts; Labor division; citizenship laws; terrorism"
date: "2017-06-01"
creators:
  - "Mccormack, Michael"
source: "MINISTER FOR SMALL BUSINESS"
subjects:
  - "Malaysian Airlines flight MH128"
  - "extension to the instant asset write-off programme"
  - "small business tax cuts"
  - "Labor division"
  - "citizenship laws"
  - "terrorism"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/247260319
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5310576%22
---

  1 

 

 The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Minister for Small Business  Federal Member for Riverina 

 

 Transcript 

 1 June 2017 

 Doorstop interview  Parliament House, Canberra   

 TOPICS: Malaysian Airlines Flight MH128; extension to the instant asset write-off  programme; small business tax cuts; Labor division; citizenship laws; terrorism.   

 E&OE 

 McCORMACK 

 First today we need to reflect on the flight last night from Melbourne to Kuala Lumpur, which was  turned back after a very distressing incident. I want to praise the crew and the passengers for their  quick and prompt actions to make sure that the situation was resolve and resolved well.  

 Of course the plane returned to Melbourne - it was en route to Kuala Lumpur - but returned to  Melbourne and the Victoria Police in conjunction with the Australian Federal Police then took the  person involved into custody and the Victoria Police and the AFP will have more to say about that  today. But I just wanted to say what a distressing situation that must have been for the passengers  and the crew and to praise them for their actions. They were very quick, very decisive and very  courageous. 

 Last night was a great night for small business. As the Small Business Minister, I was delighted the  instant asset write-off legislation went through the lower house, went through the House of  Representatives. It is so important, that legislation, for Australia’s 3.2 million small businesses who  employ 5.6 million Australians. They’re responsible, those small businesses, for $380 billion to the  gross domestic product of our nation. They keep our nation ticking.  

 To ensure that extension by 12 months to the instant asset write-off programme is something that I  have fought for. It’s something that certainly, on my nationwide small business roadshow, we heard  that this is what the small businesses of Australia wanted. And the Treasurer Scott Morrison on May  9 provided that tremendous boost for Australia’s small businesses.  

 What it enables them to do is to buy capital equipment up to $20,000, which improves their  efficiency, it improves their productivity. It even improves their staff’s morale, and perhaps even  more importantly gets more customers through the door. On my roadshow I heard that Australia’s 

  2 

 small businesses wanted it and we as a Government have listened. The Treasurer listened and  reacted in the Budget on May 9.  

 Of course, Budget Day was a great day for small business, because that’s the day that also enshrined  into law the 27.5 per cent tax rate, not just for small businesses with a turnover of up to $2 million,  which is what it was previously, but now up to $10 million.  

 The Liberals and Nationals understand that turnover doesn’t equal profit. Labor doesn’t get that. We  do. We know Australia’s small businesses open their doors very early of a morning, close them very  late at night and work damn hard for and on behalf of their communities and for and on behalf of  our nation.  

 When our small business sector is strong, so too is our nation, and that’s why we have lowered the  tax rate to 27.5 per cent. That’s why we have changed the definition of a small business up to a $10  million turnover. And last night we passed through the lower house, through the House of  Representatives, that very important Bill which now goes to the Senate to extend the instant asset  write-off programme by 12 months.  

 Last night of course we also heard of more leaks. More divisions within Labor. More leaks about yet  another Labor policy failure. And that is the citizenship programme. The citizenship programme  which Labor is very much divided on. And of course, there is only one side of politics you can trust  when it comes to border security, border integrity, and that is the Liberals and Nationals. 

 Under Labor’s watch we saw 55,000 people put in detention, including 8,000 children. What we also  saw was Labor invest far more in detention beds than they ever did in hospital beds. That was a  legacy which Labor should never be proud of.  

 But we have heard more divisions within Labor about the citizenship programme, about the  citizenship test. And that is something for Bill Shorten to decide - whether he’s going to get on  board with the Government and make sure that Labor should follow our very sensible policies, make  sure we pass our policies that do indeed ensure that our border security is as it should be. And that  is safe and secure. 

 Just like our Budget - a fair opportunity for all and security as number one.  

 Are there any questions? 

 JOURNALIST 

 What do you think of Tony Abbott’s idea that Australia should have special terror courts for  Australian jihadis returning from conflict zones? 

 McCORMACK 

 We are investing record amounts of money into our nation’s security. I know that Dan Tehan is doing  a fantastic job with cyber security. I know that Michael Keenan and other Ministers - who are the  relevant Ministers - are doing a very important and a very good job making sure that our borders  are safe and making sure that whatever we can do in the security space is done.  

 Because the first role of Government is to protect its people. The Australian Government is doing  that. And we are doing everything we can to ensure that, indeed, our borders are safe, that we are  on top of everything involved with anti-terrorism measures. So I know our Government is spending  record amounts of money and I have every faith in the intelligence and security operations of our  nation, and indeed the Government’s role in this. 

  3 

 JOURNALIST 

 Does this include considering special terror courts? 

 McCORMACK 

 Well I know the relevant agencies are doing a body of work on this at the moment. I know there are  many people with different opinions, but one thing is for sure, and that is that the first role of  Government is to make sure that our nation’s borders are safe and secure, our nation’s people are  safe and secure and that is what we are doing as a Government. 

 JOURNALIST 

 Where do you stand on the remarks made by Duncan Lewis that there is no connection between  refugees and terrorism? 

 McCORMACK 

 Everybody can have their own opinion. I know the first order of priorities is to make sure our borders  are safe. I know we are spending record amounts of money in the relevant Government agencies. I  know that Dan Tehan, that Michael Keenan and the relevant Ministers responsible and the Prime  Minister, of course, are doing everything they can to make sure we keep our borders safe, we keep  the safety and security of our nation’s citizens number one and we will continue to do that. 

 JOURNALIST 

 So you don’t have an opinion on those remarks? 

 McCORMACK 

 No I don’t.  

 JOURNALIST 

 Thank you. 

 ENDS   

 

 MEDIA CONTACT:   Dom Hopkinson - 0428 373 122 

