---
title: "Peter Dutton continues to shift blame for his own failures"
date: "2017-06-14"
creators:
  - "Neumann, Shayne"
source: "SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/248086424
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5337250%22
---

 

 SHAYNE NEUMANN MP 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BLAIR 

 PETER DUTTON CONTINUES TO SHIFT BLAME FOR HIS OWN FAILURES   

 Peter Dutton is a tick-and-flick Minister who fails to be across the detail of his portfolio  and constantly seeks to blame others for his own failures.   

 While Labor won’t comment on the legal proceedings before the Supreme Court of  Victoria, it’s clear Peter Dutton has performed incompetently as Immigration Minister.   

 Asylum seekers have languished in detention for four years since the Abbott-Turnbull  Government came to power in 2013, with Peter Dutton as the Immigration Minister  since December 2014.   

 Manus Island and Nauru were set up as regional transit processing facilities but have  become places of indefinite detention because of the inaction of the Abbott-Turnbull  Government and their failure to find other third country resettlement arrangements.    

 Labor strongly supports the US refugee resettlement agreement, but the Turnbull  Government has put all its eggs in one basket and confirmed they are no longer seeking  other third country resettlement arrangements.   

 There are potentially hundreds of genuine refugees who will miss out on the opportunity  to be resettled in the United States and could be left to languish in Regional Processing  Centres as a result of Peter Dutton’s inaction.   

 Peter’s Dutton’s management of offshore processing arrangements has been woefully  incompetent and resulted in Labor initiating a Senate Inquiry after he failed to act on  serious allegations of harm, abuse and mistreatment of asylum seekers outlined in the  Nauru Files.   

 It beggars belief that Peter Dutton is yet again seeking to blame Labor for his own  inability to manage his department and simply just do his job.    

 An Australian National Audit Office report recently found that on the consolidation of  contracts in Nauru and on Manus Island in 2013-14, under the Coalition Government,  the department spent over $1 billion without appropriate authorisation and had no ability 

 to demonstrate appropriate risk management or even deliver the Australian public value  for money.   

 It’s time for Peter Dutton to stop blaming everyone else for his own failures as  Immigration Minister. He needs to concentrate on his current job rather than any future  job he aspires to achieve.    

 He may fancy himself a future Prime Minister but he can’t even do the job he’s got now.   

 WEDNESDAY, 14 JUNE 2017    

 MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110   

