---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Gladstone: 30 August 2017: energy; jobs in Gladstone and regional Queensland; marriage equality postal survey; university cuts"
date: "2017-08-30"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "energy"
  - "jobs in Gladstone and regional Queensland"
  - "marriage equality postal survey"
  - "university cuts"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/250553240
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5487132%22
---

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION 

 SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND ABORIGINAL  AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS  MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG   

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  GLADSTONE  WEDNESDAY, 30 AUGUST 2017   

 SUBECT/S: Energy; Jobs in Gladstone and regional Queensland, Marriage  equality postal survey, university cuts   

 CHRIS KETTER, SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND: G'day. This is Chris Ketter, I am a  Labor Senator for Queensland. So it's great to welcome Bill Shorten here again to  Gladstone. Today we've been looking at the Northern Oil Advance Bio-fuels Pilot Plant  here at Yarwun in Gladstone. An amazing place and it's bringing together a lot of  advanced technology and amazing skills. Now, that segues into what I want to talk  about which is of course, we find ourselves in the middle of National Skills Week this  week. And we need to talk about what this government is doing in terms of skills at the  moment. And the story is not good. Across Australia, we have 148,000 fewer  apprentices that have commenced since the Coalition Government commenced, and of  course, that is 36 per cent reduction. In the seat of Flynn where we are now, the  situation is even worse. It's a 45 per cent reduction in the number of apprentices since  the election of the Coalition Government. That's 1,771 fewer apprentices across this  wonderful electorate. So, what is this government doing about this problem? Well in  fact, what they announced in the 2017 Budget was that they were going to cut funding  to TAFE. Over $630 million cut. And also introducing a bizarrely funded plan to skill  Australians, entirely funded out of the visa fees for foreign workers. Independent  analysis has shown that this program is not going to deliver the number of apprentices  that it proposes.    

 In contrast to that, of course we have the Labor Opposition which has a fully funded  apprenticeship plan. And one of the promises that we've made is that we will reserve  the $637 million cuts to TAFE funding and apprenticeships, as well as putting $100  million into a Building TAFE for the Future fund,  which goes into, most importantly, into  regional and outer-Melbourne TAFE campuses so that those campuses can be  revitalised.    

 So we have a solid plan. In this electorate unfortunately, the people of Flynn have been  let down by their local representative, Ken O'Dowd, who continues to support this ill-considered Skilling Australians fund. He is presiding over a reduction in the number of  apprentices in this area, and there is an unprecedented number of people applying for  the limited apprenticeships that are available here.    

 So Gladstone, and Central Queensland more broadly, needs a Labor Government that  is going to deliver in terms of jobs and skills for Central Queensland. So with those  words, I'll hand it over to Bill Shorten.   

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Chris. First of all, I just want  to thank Southern Oil, and the parent company, and Northern Oil, the company doing  remarkable work here. This is an exciting project, and hopefully it's a project which all  Australians will come to learn about. This is a joint venture with engineers backing  themselves in and new ideas for Australia. It's about bio-fuels. What this company is  doing is taking waste products and recycling them and creating new fuels from recycling  waste products. It is a very clever idea. It is creating value from items which there was  no previous value deemed to be had. And this is cutting edge technology, cutting edge  technology. 28 people are now working here. There's been tens of millions of dollars  invested. And the eyes of a lot people in the energy market, in the oil and diesel  business, they're all focused on Gladstone,  and on Yarwun and on this refinery. I think  it has got a lot of potential.   

 But where you have got this sort of leadership, this sort of innovation, this sort of job-creating project which is all about recycling waste products, it's about time we had the  same leadership from Canberra. It's about time we saw some of that same courage that  we are seeing by investors and business people, by the workforce here, by engineers,  with big ideas and big dreams, we need to see a little bit of that spirit in Canberra.   

 Instead though, we've just got more talk and more hot air from the Turnbull  Government. Today, they've called in the energy companies again, no doubt to wag the  finger, no doubt to just try and say what are we doing about energy prices. But the real  problem is that Mr Turnbull looks at rising energy prices as another political problem. He  doesn't understand that this is a human problem. He doesn't understand how painful it  is for ordinary Australians and businesses to have rising, out of control energy prices.  Today, he needs to demonstrate he has real solutions, not more window dressing.  Happy to take questions.   

 JOURNALIST: On that one, are energy retailers doing enough to lower prices?    

 SHORTEN: I think it is a collective effort required. I've got no doubt that energy retailers  need to do more but the Government in Canberra needs to do more. The number one  fact, the number one cause of why energy prices are rising is a lack of policy certainty at  the national level, that's what all the experts are saying. Now, the Government  commissioned the Chief Scientist to try and steer a way through the internal civil war of  the Liberal Party and come up with a science, evidenced-based solution so we can get  investment back into energy. At the moment, there is insufficient investment in energy  because there is a lack of policy certainty. So, as coal-fired power stations come to the  end of their working life, or even go beyond their technical working life, we are not 

 seeing new investment because there is policy vacuum. You've got great businesses  like this trying to do the best they can.    

 What we need is a Clean Energy Target. We've extended the hand of compromise to  the Government. If it's a fair dinkum Clean Energy Target and I stress fair dinkum, then  we are up to working with them to see how it can be done. And I have certainly offered  the services of my Energy Minister, Mark Butler, to work with the current Minister,  Frydenberg, to see how we can make energy policy not be a political football.    

 The trouble is Mr Turnbull sees energy prices as just another political problem in his  diary. He doesn't understand the pain that causes to ordinary Australians. We need to  see real solutions, not just window dressing.   

 JOURNALIST: So will you do whatever the Government decides with relation to the  Clean Energy Target later on this year?    

 SHORTEN: No, it has to be fair dinkum. It has to be evidenced-based. We are offering  to sit down and negotiate. The problem is that for energy prices in this country, nothing  is going to get better in the long term until we've got policy certainty, which unlocks the  investment dollars, which then unlocks downward pressure on energy prices. The  Government's got to not look at energy and climate policy and the prices which ordinary  Australians pay as another political problem. It's a human problem, it's very painful for  ordinary Australians. I don't think Mr Turnbull understands how painful rising energy  prices are for ordinary Australians.   

 Now, we need real solutions, not more window dressing.    

 JOURNALIST: Ken O'Dowd says the Opposition doesn't actually have an energy plan.  What are you going to do help Central Queenslanders?    

 SHORTEN: Oh well, I am not going to take a lecture from Ken O'Dowd on too much. In  all seriousness, we need a Clean Energy Target. It doesn't matter where you live in this  country, the number one cause for rising energy prices is a lack of policy certainty.  That's what all the experts are saying. I mean at Curtis Island, we are at ground zero of  one of the problems which is of course is the exporter gas. It is beyond belief that  Japanese industrial companies can buy Australian gas in Japan cheaper than  Australian industrial companies can buy gas in Australia. That's clearly one of the  issues. But we need a Clean Energy Target. What Mr Turnbull needs to say today is he  needs to come out with real solutions, not just more window dressing.   

 JOURNALIST: So would Labor be open to re-nationalising elements of the industry?   

 SHORTEN: Oh, I don't know if we have to re-nationalise, but I do want to make sure  that Australian companies get first crack at Australian gas. I do want to make sure that  we've got fair dinkum policies which capture some of the tidal wave of renewable energy  investment that's going on throughout the world.    

 Good businesses like this can expand to become even bigger and better businesses,  making a real impact, for instance, on diesel prices through bio-diesel. What we need is 

 a government in Canberra not constantly chopping and changing programs, creating  uncertainty. This project we're at today is a great jobs generator for Gladstone. We  know that Gladstone needs to diversify its economy. You've got cement here, you've got  power stations, you've got the refinery, the Rio refinery, you've got the port, and now  you're going to have biofuels. This development here adds to the strength of Central  Queensland's economy.  

 JOURNALIST: Queensland has one of the lowest electricity prices in Australia, isn't that  evidence that government ownership can drive down prices?  

 SHORTEN: I think that's a fair point you're making. One of the culprits, which the  Liberals never like to talk about in Canberra, or the LNP up here, one of the culprits, I  believe, for out of control electricity prices was the privatisation of electricity generators  in places like Victoria. What happened is that these electricity generators were sold at a  very high one-off price and the private operators, ever since then, have been basically  trying to screw down costs and bleed these assets to recoup some of the money they  paid for it. But the problem is, that that's meant that ordinary Australians are paying  more for their energy prices because they come second behind shareholders of these  large energy generating companies. So I think the privatisation has been a net-negative  in electrical generation, and I think that we're seeing some of the problems with  privatisation come home to roost in 2017.  

 JOURNALIST: A same-sex marriage ad was launched this morning by the No  Campaign, what are your thoughts on that? 

 SHORTEN: When I first saw the ad I wondered if it was a send-up, I thought it was, I  just thought the ad was so primitive. I thought it was rubbish frankly. The idea that if you  vote in this $122 million postal survey, that somehow your little boys who go to school  are going to be made to wear dresses, is just ridiculous. It's offensive. We shouldn't be  having this postal survey, we should just pass a law in Canberra. The number of people  who have stopped me in the street, they don't even care that I'm the Labor Opposition  Leader who's opposed the postal survey, a lot of Australians are white hot with anger  that this money is being wasted on a postal survey when the Parliament's there to do its  job anyway. 

 So a lot of Australians are genuinely teed right off with this whole process. And then  what we've seen, as we predicted, is we're seeing LGBTI Australians, same-sex  couples, gay Australians, all of a sudden having to justify their relationships. All of a  sudden, when we thought a lot of this discriminatory nonsense was done and dusted, a  thing of the past, now we're seeing license given to add somehow bagging same-sex  couples.  

 You know, these ads, what does it mean to a same-sex couple and their children, when  they've got to go to school and they know the other kids have seen the ads, and they're  making fun of their parent's relationship. It's rubbish, it's unnecessary, but it's the result  of a weak Prime Minister giving us a $122 million postal survey that no one wants, just  because he can't sort out his own political party problems.  

 JOURNALIST: Did it pass the test of treating each other with respect across the  community?  

 SHORTEN: I think Australians will be the judge of that. It doesn't pass my test, but it will  be up to Australians to decide what they think about it. But the idea that someone's  marriage is going to mean that something else happens in a school, that little boys have  got to dress up - we're doing exactly what the makers of the ad want us to do, we're  talking about it, so I probably don't want to dignify any further conversation on it. I just  say to LGBTI Australians, we're on your side. This is just rubbish, this will pass. I'm  sorry it's happening.  

 JOURNALIST: And you mentioned diversification, you're speaking at the jobs forum  later this afternoon, what can Gladstone do to diversify and produce those jobs? This is  obviously one aspect, but I imagine more could be done? 

 SHORTEN: NBN, energy, port access road. If Labor had gotten elected at the last  election, that port access road would have been built. You've got a lot of strengths here.  You've got a highly skilled workforce, you've done it tough no doubt, and we've seen a  lot of families leave the area, but you are quite a diversified economy. Gladstone in  my opinion, and I've been visiting Gladstone for two decades, has never been afraid to  roll up its sleeves and bid for jobs. As I said, you've got the cement operations, you've  got the Rio refinery, you've got the power station, and of course you've got this new  business, and of course you've got the port, you've got tourism, you're also a service  centre for a lot of the mining that happens further West.  

 What we need to do is make sure you've got good infrastructure, you've got reliable  NBN, and of course downward pressure on energy, and as Senator Ketter said, let's do  something about getting more apprenticeships back into the region so that local kids  can pursue a career and a future through a quality apprenticeship.  

 JOURNALIST: Jumping back to a national issue, have you been briefed on the people  smuggling boat which reached Australia early this month, the seven people onboard? 

 SHORTEN: No, the Government needs to come clean. They've got to view us as  working with them, rather than treating the Australian people and the Parliament,  keeping us in the dark. We don't know what's happened here. I think the Government  needs to explain how this has happened, and how we can make sure it doesn't happen  again.  

 JOURNALIST: Do you think those operators are again testing Australia's policy  resolve?  

 SHORTEN: I don't know, again, the Government has got the facts, they're just not  telling us.  

 JOURNALIST: Do you take any responsibility for the arrival given the softening  language you have used in recent days about the treatment of refugees? 

 SHORTEN: This government's been in power for the last four years. They've given  themselves more medals on border security than can be pinned on their chest. And now  when something goes wrong, what do they do? They blame us. We're not the  Government. Although the way this government obsesses about me and Labor, I almost  think that when Parliament resumes, they should sit where we sit, and we should sit  where they sit.  

 Because the Government's obsessed about me and Labor. My message to Australians  is I'm focussed on you. I'm focused on your healthcare, I'm focused on your energy bills,  I'm focused on your kids getting proper jobs, that's what I'm focused on. Whenever  anything goes wrong, the Government just blames Labor. They need to get on with the  business of looking after Australians and spend less time worrying about Labor.  

 JOURNALIST: Matt Canavan's raised this idea about an army battalion being relocated  from Brisbane to Rockhampton, do you support that?  

 SHORTEN: I'm going to take the best advice from our defence experts and other  people. I think the Shoalwater development's good a good development in terms of  being used as training facilities. I think before we talk about moving our military assets,  you do it as part of a general strategic plan rather than, perhaps, headline hunting in the  local paper.  

 JOURNALIST: The Labor-Gillard Government proposed $6 billion in savings from the  tertiary education sector in the 2013 budget, on that basis, would you support cuts  proposed by Simon Birmingham today? 

 SHORTEN: No. Again, this is a government worrying about what we did four years ago.  That's what they get the big pay for and the white limos, and the chaos and the  incompetence which they're sewing across Australia. I'll tell you my plan for higher  education - make it easier for working class kids to go to university. Make it easier for  families who've never had a child who's gone to university, to get there. I think that  when you increase the HECS fees, when you decrease the threshold at which the  payments are due and have to be repaid, when you cut universities, you make it harder  for this country to become a smarter nation.  

 Australia's young people get a bad rap in some parts of the media, but they're expected,  in many cases forced out of the housing market, they've got to save for their  superannuation which is decades to come before they retire, they've got to pay their  GST, but a lot of Government services don't go to young people, they've got to pay their  Medicare levy, yet on average they're healthier. Young Australians are doing a pretty  good job, but this is a Government who's making it harder for them to go to university,  they're not getting their penalty rates, they're not doing anything on climate change and  leaving a bigger mess for future generations to solve. So no, we're not interested in  Senator Birmingham trying to rationalise his cuts in 2017 by blaming Labor. We're not  up for that. Last question. 

 JOURNALIST: Did you have a comment on the passing of former Whitlam Government  Health Minister, Doug Everingham?  

 SHORTEN: Yes. Doug Everingham was in his 90s but he had a very distinguished  career as a Labor politician, of course, very popular in Queensland. People forget that  when he became the Health Minister he introduced support for Community Health  Centres. When you travel the length and breadth of Australia, one of the important  safety nets of our health system are Community Health Centres. This bloke created  them forty plus years ago for every Australian who goes to a Community Health Centre  and gets that care that they need or for their child or a family member, that was Doug  Everingham. So may he rest in peace. Thank you everybody.  

 ENDS    

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053   

