---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Adelaide: 3 February 2017: South Australian economy; crossbench negotiations; Bill Shorten and Chris Bowen's failure to support budget savings; refugee resettlement"
date: "2017-02-03"
creators:
  - "Morrison, Scott"
source: "TREASURER"
subjects:
  - "South Australian economy"
  - "crossbench negotiations"
  - "Bill Shorten and Chris Bowen's failure to support budget savings"
  - "refugee resettlement"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/241283705
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5077116%22
---

 1  

 

 

 The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Treasurer 

 

 TRANSCRIPT 

 DOORSTOP INTERVIEW, ADELAIDE  FRIDAY 3 FEBRUARY 2017 

 

 E&OE   

 Subjects:  South  Australian  economy;  crossbench  negotiations;  Bill  Shorten  and  Chris  Bowen’s   failure to support Budget savings; Refugee resettlement   

 TREASURER: Happy to be here in South Australia and on such a beautiful day and I just had the great  opportunity  to  catch  up  with  Steven  Marshall  to  talk  about  a  range  of  things  but  particularly  the    need  for  infrastructure  projects  here  in South Australia  that  go  to  both  improving  productivity  but   also  improve  the  lives  of  South  Australians.  We  have  a  very  keen  interest  in  looking  at  project   opportunities and the infrastructure needs of South Australia in a way that boosts productivity but  also ensuring that the living standards and quality of life of South Australians are also supported.   

 QUESTION: Did he make any specific requests for funding for certain projects?   

 TREASURER: Well he took me through their project plan that they’ve been working on, that they’ve  been talking about now for some time, both rail and road. I think these are very exciting plans and I  think they’re the sort of plans that you would hope a State Government, should they be able to form  one after the next election, that they’d be able to pursue. Issue of funding and how that’s done and  the  partnerships  that  are  necessary,  I  think  Steven  Marshall  has  always  demonstrated  a  real   innovation in this area, and that’s what needed for those types of projects.   

 QUESTION: (inaudible)   

 TREASURER: Look they were the main ones we spoke about today. But that’s a fairly big project, and  fairly  big integrated plan, transport  infrastructure plan for South Australia. As a Government we’re  very  focused on those types of initiatives. To the extent to  which the Federal Government has the  ability to participate in these, well they will be discussions for down the track if they’re able to form   a Government.   

 QUESTIONS: (Inaudible)   

 TREASURER: I’ll leave that to others in South Australia to comment on. What I know is that in Steven  Marshall there’s someone who is thinking innovatively about South Australia’s future and its needs  and  the  economic  challenges  that  South  Australia  faces  and  I’m  very  keen  to  be  working  with  my   South  Australian  colleagues  here  in  ensuring  that  our  national  economic  policies  mean  that  South   Australians are brought along with the growth we’re hoping to achieve in the years ahead.   

 QUESTION:  You met Senator Xenophon today to talk about savings measures. What’s he asking for?   

 TREASURER:  I’ll  leave  those  discussions  between  Senator  Xenophon  and  his  team,  who  I  met  with   today,  and  myself.  We  will  continue  to  work  constructively  with  the  crossbench.  We  will  be   introducing some important measures next week, and obviously they will ultimately go to the Senate  and we  will  be  seeking support  from  right  across  the  Parliament.  But  I'm  not  going to  give Bill 

 2  

 Shorten and Chris Bowen a leave pass when it comes to their first responsibility to be supporting the  Government  to  bring  the  Budget  back  to  balance.  It  was  the  Rudd-Gillard-Rudd  Government  that   trashed the  Budget,  and now  when they  are  in opposition,  they are  not  doing what's necessary  to  support  this  Government,  in  bringing  it  back  to  balance.  So,  while  I  look  forward  positively  and   optimistically to what we hopefully might be able to achieve with Senator Xenophon and his team,  that  is  not  to  relieve  from Chris  Bowen  and  Bill  Shorten  their  responsibility  to  stump  up.  The  only   thing  they  are  proposing  is  higher  taxes,  and  there  are  savings  that  can  be  made  and  need  to  be   made for expenditures that used to exist, that rose to meet rising revenues that we used to see from  mining  investment  booms  and  commodities  and  so  on,  and  expenditure  has  to  be  framed  against    the long-term outlook for revenue, not on the fantasies of Chris Bowen and Bill Shorten.   

 QUESTION: Treasurer, where does the refugee transfer process now stand since the publicity about  Donald Trump saying it was a dumb idea?   

 TREASURER:  Well,  the  Prime  Minister  and  the  Minister  for  Immigration  are  the  ones  who’ll  speak   more in detail about these things to the extent that they are in a position to do so. But what is clear,  what we have seen from Bill Shorten is he has failed a test of leadership. When Bill Shorten's feet are  put  to  the  fire,  they  melt,  and  we  saw  that.  There  was  a  clear  national  interest  in  supporting  the   Prime  Minister  in  the  strong  stand  he  has  taken,  standing  up  for  Australian  interests  in  these   discussions with President Trump to  ensure that an arrangement that will see legitimate refugees,  people who have actually already been through a process and found to be refugees, to ensure that  they can be resettled under the terms of the arrangement, which were put in place in an agreement  with  the  Obama  administration.  Now,  it  is  in  the  national  interest  of  Australia  for  Australians  to   come together and support ensuring that we are able to continue to have that arrangement in place,  and  what  we  saw  from  Bill  Shorten  was  just  the  usual  rank  opportunism  of  a  political  hack  who   wanted to spoil. That's where he fails the test of leadership on every occasion.   

 QUESTION: What do you think of the way Donald Trump has spoken to Malcolm Turnbull?   

 TREASURER: I wasn't part of that conversation. What I do know is that our Prime Minister stood up  for Australia's interests, and I've known Malcolm Turnbull for a long time and he has never one to be  cowered in any way. He will speak politely, respectfully, but strongly in Australia's national interest,  and  that's  exactly  what  he  did  and  it  is  disappointing  that  Bill  Shorten,  rather  than  saying,  "Well   done, Malcolm. Good on you for sticking up for Australia's national interest," just had to get engaged  in the usual rank politics that he is well-known for.   

 QUESTION: Do you think the deal will fall through?   

 TREASURER: I believe that there has been very good faith gone into this process by the officials who  have  been  working  away  on  this,  and  obviously  from  our  end  we  have  been  able  to  get  this   agreement  to  where  it  is  now,  and  I  believe  we  will  continue  to  work  through  that  arrangement,   based  on  the  commitments  that  both  President  Trump  has  given  to  the  Prime  Minister  and  we've   given  to  the  United  States.  The  agreement  provides,  appropriately,  for  a  vetting  process  on  the   individuals,  but  I  think  it's  important  to  note  that  these  are  individuals  who  have  already  been   through  a  refugee  assessment  process  in  accordance  with  the  UNHCR  guidelines,  and  these   individuals have been found to be refugees - they are people who, in the vast majority of cases are  already  living in  the  community,  in Nauru,  which  is  different  to  how  that  has  been  represented by   others.  So  look,  it  is  a  constructive  arrangement  that  has  been  put  in  place  to  solve  a  difficult   problem. We have no solutions from the Labor Party on this, just a cynical culture of complaint and  rank populism and politics. So Malcolm Turnbull and Peter Dutton and the rest of the Government  are just getting on with solving the problems for Australia. Thanks very much for your time.   

 [ENDS] 

 3  

 Further information: Julian Leembruggen 0400 813 253, Sonia Gentile 0455 050 007 

