---
title: "Transcript of doorstop interview: Perth: 3 February 2017: Labor's plan for jobs and apprenticeships; banking royal commission; One Nation; Donald Trump; US refugee settlement deal; Government's Indigenous advancement strategy"
date: "2017-02-03"
creators:
  - "Shorten, Bill"
source: "LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION"
subjects:
  - "Labor's plan for jobs and apprenticeships"
  - "banking royal commission"
  - "One Nation"
  - "Donald Trump"
  - "US refugee settlement deal"
  - "Government's Indigenous advancement strategy"
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/241283703
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5077112%22
---

 

 

 THE HON. BILL SHORTEN MP  LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AFFAIRS AND  ABORIGINAL AND TORRES STRAIT ISLANDERS 

 MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG 

 

 

 E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  PERTH  FRIDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2017   

 SUBJECT/S: Labor’s plan for jobs and apprenticeships; Banking Royal  Commission; One Nation; Donald Trump; US refugee settlement deal;  Government's Indigenous advancement strategy 

 CASSIE ROWE, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR BELMONT: Hello I'm Cassie Rowe the  Labor candidate for Belmont and it's great to have Bill and Chris here today to talk  about apprenticeships in WA and jobs.    

 BILL SHORTEN, LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Thanks Cassie, it's great to be  here talking to apprentices, talking about the future of jobs and apprenticeships in  Western Australia and in Australia. I'm here also with Chris Bowen because we're  both fundamentally committed to making sure that Western Australia has its fair  share of jobs and apprenticeships. There is a crisis at the moment in Western  Australia in terms of youth unemployment. It's about 14 per cent - that isn't good  enough and the only plans that Colin Barnett and Malcolm Turnbull have for jobs is  to import people on temporary visas into Western Australia to do the jobs that our  young people should be doing. It is not a strategy for jobs to import the skills, we  should be training our own young Australians.    

 That's why Labor has a plan for jobs and it starts with apprenticeships and training.  You can't have a plan for jobs if you don't have a plan for apprenticeships. That's  why we want to see on Commonwealth projects where there's taxpayer money, one  in 10 people employed would be apprentices. That means that employers can put on  apprentices knowing that they're able to keep supporting them and able to pay for  them. So it's employ apprentices. It's also putting TAFE and vocational education  right back at the centre of everything we do. Properly funding vocational education  and also supporting our TAFE. And thirdly, it's about making sure that our 457 and  temporary visa scheme, where you bring people from overseas for temporary  periods of time is not being rorted, that we shut down the loopholes. So we've got a 

 three point plan for jobs which is about apprenticeships, which is about more support  for TAFE, it's about one in 10 employees on big jobs should be apprentices and it's  about cracking down on the loopholes. It's a good solid plan, it's a practical plan. It's  what parents out there want to hear about giving their young people some hope for  the future.    

 In the same context, I need to just comment on the Small Business Commissioner’s  damning new report into the treatment of banks - big banks, of small business. The  former Liberal Leader, Kate Carnell, who is now the Small Business Commissioner  has had a look at the treatment of the big banks to small business and she says that  after 17 different inquiries nothing seems to change the attitude of big banks. Well  Labor's got a plan to help small business and protect them from  the unconscionable conduct of some of the big banks and some of those in big  banking. Our plan is to have a Banking Royal Commission to fundamentally change  the culture and approach, to make sure that small business get a fair deal from big  business and big banks in particular. Only a Royal Commission with its powers and  capacity to investigate matters can be the game changer that we need in Australian  banking to look after small business. I do not understand why the Government  continues to refuse to put big banks under the microscope, it is very clear that  Malcolm Turnbull is the big banks man in Canberra and whilst he's there the banks  aren't going to get pulled into line.    

 Happy to take questions.   

 JOURNALIST: Banking Royal Commission sounds like something that One Nation  would be happy with. Rod Culleton certainly would and we're hearing today that One  Nation has been having chats with Labor and Liberal with regards to preferences,  what’s your comment on that?   

 SHORTEN: Well I just want to correct what you said to begin with if you don't mind.  The Banking Royal Commission sounds like something Labor is going to do and only  Labor can form a Government in this country. If you want to see a Banking Royal  Commission, vote Labor, if you want to see the big banks bought to heel, vote Labor.  Labor is determined to have a Banking Royal Commission which will once and for all  improve the conduct of the big banks. In terms of One Nation and what they say and  do, if you want to change the government in Western Australia you can waste your  vote on a protest for a third party or you can vote for Mark McGowan and his Labor  team including Cassie here in Belmont. If you want to change the government of  Western Australia the only way to do it is to vote Labor. So I know that Mark  McGowan in the West, he's chasing people's first vote. Our strategy for politics be it  at the national level or of Western Australia is to have good, sensible policies which  help people in their daily lives, and in order to do that what we're asking people to do  is vote one for Labor, full stop.   

 JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed that that approach to One Nation was made by  WA Labor.   

 SHORTEN: I'm not aware of it. I have to say, when it comes to fighting this election  in Western Australia, Mark McGowan's made it clear, he won't privatise Western  Power - 

 

 [Aircraft Noise]   

 SHORTEN: Do you want to repeat your question please?   

 JOURNALIST: Were you disappointed that WA Labor made that approach to One  Nation to woo preference deals? 

 SHORTEN: Listen, I know WA Labor's strategy is to get as many votes first votes as  it can. Mark McGowan has made it clear he won't privatise Western Power, and at  the core of his economic plan is to create, maintain and sustain good jobs. That's the  core of our view.    

 I've said at the start of 2017 we have three economic priorities - jobs, jobs and jobs.  And the reason why we're here today talking about training is, this nation needs to  put TAFE and vocational education right at the centre of its plan for jobs. We need to  be making sure that our young people realise they don't just have to go to university,  that they can get a good job in the trades.    

 We are a tradie nation - 1.6 million of our fellow Australians has a trades  qualification. I was raised in a house where my dad was a fitter and turner before he  became a seafarer and it was always made clear to my brother and I, if you want to  go to uni, that's good, or if you want to do a trade, that's good.    

 We understand in Labor the important power of apprenticeships and we want to put  more government grunt behind encouraging apprenticeships, but to do that, if  parents are going to encourage their kids to do apprenticeships, there's got to be  jobs there, there has got to be support.    

 Labor's plan is all about jobs and at the centre of that you need to have a national  training plan. We should be the best in the world at training our young people and  indeed our adults who are seeking to retrain.    

 The Turnbull Government has no plans for training. Their only economic strategy is  to give $50 billion away to large companies who will simply put it in their pocket or  remit it overseas, and to give multimillionaires a tax cut. That's not an economic plan,  that's trickle-down economics. That's crubs from the rich man's table economics.  That's what Malcolm Turnbull is.    

 JOURNALIST: What do you make of the way that Donald Trump spoke to Malcolm  Turnbull?    

 SHORTEN: I don't think either Trump or Turnbull have covered themselves in glory  in the last few days, but I have to say that I think that Mr Trump needs to understand  and show greater respect to Australia and the Australian alliance than he seems to  be displaying, if the reports are right. This may surprise you, but whilst I'm not a fan  of the way Mr Turnbull has been handling matters, on this one I don't - I've got some  sympathy for him because quite bluntly, I don't think you can run an American-Australian alliance by Twitter. If the media reports are right, I think Mr Trump needs 

 to show more respect to Malcolm Turnbull and to Australia than it would appear has  happened.    

 JOURNALIST: Your Deputy says she was offended by the treatment of Malcolm  Turnbull. Are you?    

 SHORTEN: I think in this I've said that I'm not a fan of Mr Turnbull obviously on his  domestic policies, but as I said in answer to the earlier question, it would appear that  Mr Trump needs to show more respect to Australia and the Australian alliance than  he is doing if the media reports that we've got are correct. Now, I don't think either of  them have covered themselves in glory, but in this case for once, I'm more on  Malcolm Turnbull's side because Australians have to stick together.    

 JOURNALIST: You said you are not a fan of his domestic policies. Is it fair to say  that Labor is responsible for the current situation with offshore detention? Do you  take responsibility for the part that Labor has played?    

 SHORTEN: Oh, well, goodness me, the Government has now been in for nearly four  years. They've got to stop blaming everyone else for what's going on now. I mean, at  a certain point, if the Government finds governing too hard, they should get out of the  way and let someone who wants to, to actually govern, but this is not good enough  anymore in 2017 to be blaming previous government's back from four, five years  ago.    

 We need to get the refugee deal done, I think that's important. We've given  bipartisanship to the Government on their policies. I do wish that the current  government when they were in opposition had supported our Malaysia Solution  which would have seen people not be in the situation they are now in.    

 When the Government were in Opposition, they were negative about everything the  then government did. Under my leadership, Labor has indicated its support for some  of the measure the Government is trying to do. I think that's what Australians want  out of politics in 2017 and just as I’ve got sympathy and support for Malcolm Turnbull  in the conduct he appears to have received from Donald Trump, I'm not going to  approach every issue of the day and say simply, Liberal bad.    

 What I am going to do is focus on the issues. Now, I don't think they have got a plan  for apprenticeships, I don't think they've seemed to have handled everything  correctly about their talking to Donald Trump, but nonetheless, what I think annoys  Australians, is if they think it's just he said, she said politics, it's all just playground,  petty bickering. We have got to step above that and that's why we offer  bipartisanship support for the refugee deal so we can resolve these matters.    

 JOURNALIST: A major report into the Government's Indigenous advancement  strategy has just been released and it’s pretty scathing. It says that the strategy was  not effectively implemented and that the grants administration processes fell short of  the standard required. What do you make of that?    

 SHORTEN: I think it has been a disaster from the get go, ever since Tony Abbott  introduced these policies, it has been a disaster. Our First Australians are worse off 

 since the Coalition Government's been in. And nothing that Mr Turnbull's done  seems to have changed anything. Both Abbott and Turnbull have been hopeless on  Aboriginal affairs.    

 JOURNALIST: The Government has announced $10 million over four years to  improve program evaluation. Your response to that?    

 SHORTEN: It's all a bit too little, too late, isn't it? I think they need to go back and  talk to Aboriginal people about what they want, but again, what I don't want to see is  Abbott and Turnbull having a blame game between them. In this matter they've all  been responsible for it.    

 What I would like to see them do is put their hand up, take responsibility. What they  should do is go back and talk to Aboriginal communities, and rather do this top-down  approach, do the bottom-up, give people control over their own lives. That's  generally what works best for all of us. Thanks, everybody.   

 ENDS   

 MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S OFFICE MEDIA UNIT - 02 6277 4053   

