---
title: "Government continues strong support for Coptic Christians"
date: "2017-05-31"
creators:
  - "Hawke, Alex"
source: "ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND BORDER PROTECTION"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/247260418
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5310618%22
---

 The Hon Alex Hawke MP  Assistant Minister for Immigration and Border Protection 

 Wednesday, 31 May 2017 

 Government continues strong support for Coptic Christians  The Turnbull Government continues to support Coptic Christians who have been assessed as being  owed protection through the Refugee and Humanitarian Programme. Updated country information  received by the Government in recent days highlights the violence Copts are facing at the hands of  Islamic State terrorists. 

 Since 2013, over 550 protection visas have been granted. Minister Dutton and Assistant Minister  Hawke have also intervened in a total of 70 cases to grant visas over the last year. 

 Immediately following the horrific attacks on 26th May, Prime Minister Turnbull expressed his  condolences to the Coptic Christian community in Australia, “The loss of more followers of the  Coptic Christian faith to terrorism is felt deeply by the rest of the Australian community. Australia  stands united with the Coptic Christians in shared resolve to eradicate the scourge of terrorism,”  the Prime Minister said. 

 Assistant Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, Alex Hawke is reviewing all protection  applications by Coptic Christians that have been refused by both the Department and the  Administrative Appeals Tribunal. 

 “The Government will carefully assess cases of Coptic Christians in Australia during this period of  emergency in Egypt. Copts in Australia will have an appropriate visa during this period to remain  lawfully here,” Mr Hawke said. 

 “The Government actively monitors and updates country information and will continue to work  with the Coptic community, the local Coptic Church, the Australian Embassy in Egypt and the  Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade to ensure immigration decisions reflect the current  situation in Egypt. 

 “Like any other visa applicant, each case will be assessed on its merits with careful consideration  given to the identity; authenticity of documents; credibility of claims and character of the applicant.  Those found not to engage Australia’s protection obligations will be expected to depart Australia at  an appropriate time in the future,” Mr Hawke said. 

 The Government will continue to monitor the situation closely and take advice as the situation  develops. 

 Australia consistently ranks in the top three resettlement countries in the world and last year  delivered the largest offshore humanitarian programme in over 30 years. The Turnbull Government  has also delivered an additional 12,000 visas to those displaced by the conflicts in Syria and Iraq and  assessed as most vulnerable, including persecuted minorities, women, children and families. 

 Our programme continues to grow to 16,250 next year and 18,750 the following year. The most  vulnerable, including Coptic Christians, will continue to be resettled under our generous  programme. 

 

