---
title: "Greens condemn latest 'secret' plan to cut support to asylum seekers by Turnbull Government"
date: "2017-08-27"
creators:
  - "Mckim, Nick"
source: "AUSTRALIAN GREENS"
subjects:
trove_url: http://trove.nla.gov.au/version/250540511
source_url: http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22media/pressrel/5483548%22
---

 Media Release: Greens condemn latest ‘secret’ plan to cut support to asylum seekers  by Turnbull Government 

 Senator Richard Di Natale, Australian Greens Leader  Senator Nick McKim, Australian Greens Immigration spokesperson 

 August 27, 2017 

 The Australian Greens have condemned the Turnbull Government for secretly implementing yet  another cruel policy against asylum seekers. 

 “The Immigration Minister has far too much power, and this week he has been able to secretly  exercise that power in the most inhumane, cruel and heartless way against people who are fleeing  persecution,” said Greens Leader, Dr Richard Di Natale. 

 “Australia is better than this. Australians won’t accept a Minister who wants to kick people while they  are down, who wants to inflict more trauma and suffering on people who are already doing it so  tough. 

 “These are people who want to contribute to the community and, like we do for all Australians, it is  absolutely the role of the Government to provide a little bit of support when they need it. 

 “What will it take for Bill Shorten and the Labor Party to take a stand and say enough is enough? It’s 

 up to Mr Shorten to take a strong stand against the Government’s cruelty,” concluded Dr Di Natale. 

 Greens spokesperson for Immigration, Senator Nick McKim added, “The Greens are taking advice as 

 to how we can reverse the Minister’s decision in the Senate. 

 “If this is a disallowable instrument, then reversing it will hinge on the Labor party - who have to  decide whether they will accept abject cruelty as a policy position. 

 “Clearly, this government cannot be trusted with people’s lives - which is why we need to have more  oversight of these Ministerial powers, not less. 

 “We will work with the community to fight the Minister’s heartless use of his powers. This is a  despicable and monstrous decision that all decent Australians will condemn." Contact:  Matt Siegel (Di Natale) - 0457 901 600  Pat Caruana (McKim) - 0400 425 380 

